<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>Philip Massinger</title>
      <author><name reg="Cruickshank, A. H.">A. H. Cruickshank</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>February 23, 2011</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">35365</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2011-02-23">February 23, 2011</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Robert Cicconetti, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously made
            available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)

        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">Philip Massinger</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A. H. Cruickshank</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Sometime Scholar and Fellow of New College, Oxford</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Canon of Durham, and Professor of Greek and Classical Literature, in the University of Durham</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Oxford</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Basil Blackwell, Broad Street</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1920</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='i'/><anchor id='Pgi'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Dedication</head>

<p>
Inscribed To<lb/>
Frederic G. Kenyon<lb/>
In Memory Of A Friendship<lb/>
Of Forty-Four Years
</p>

</div>

<pb n='ii'/><anchor id='Pgii'/>

<div>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/frontispiece.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Frontispiece: Philip Massinger</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface</head>

<p>
In confessing that the war made me write a book I do
not stand alone. Sensible as I am of its defects, I trust
it will help to spread the knowledge of Massinger's works,
and will invite others to deal on similar lines with the
other dramatists of the great age. The design widened
as it went on, and was then contracted. In the end I
thought it wiser to confine myself to digesting the knowledge
which I had of Massinger's text.
</p>

<p>
The Clarendon Press undertook to publish this book,
but as, owing to war-work, they could fix no date, I
asked them to release me. There would be no occasion
to mention this fact were it not that it was owing to the
original arrangement that I received much valuable help
and advice from Mr. Percy Simpson. Many other
scholars and friends have kindly aided me in various
matters, among whom I should like to mention: Mr. J. C.
Bailey, Mr. P. James Bayfield (photographer to Dulwich
College), Dr. A. C. Bradley, Mr. Robert Bridges, Mr. A. H.
Bullen, Mr. A. K. Cook, Professor W. Macneile Dixon,
Mr. H. H. E. Gaster, the Dean of Gloucester, Mr. E. Gosse,
Sir W. H. Hadow, Archdeacon Hobhouse, Sir Sidney Lee,
Mr. C. Leudesdorf, Dr. Falconer Madan, Mr. A. W. Pollard,
Dr. P. G. Smyly, the Master of University College, Durham,
Sir A. Ward, and Sir George F. Warner. Last, but not
least, I thank my wife for her skilful and ready help with
the proofs.
</p>

<p>
A. H. Cruickshank.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Philip Massinger</head>

<p>
It is interesting to revise the literary judgments of youth;
it is pleasant to find them confirmed by a more mature
judgment. This train of thought has led me to read
Massinger once more; and as I read, the desire arose to
treat his works, to the best of my ability, with the attention
to detail which modern scholarship requires. A great
amount of valuable work has been done in the last fifty
years on the writers of the Elizabethan and Jacobean
ages; but no one, perhaps with the exception of Boyle,
has applied to Massinger the care which Shakspere,
Marlowe, and Ben Jonson, to name no others, have
secured. There is no reason why any of our great
dramatists should be treated with less respect than those
of Greece and Rome, of France and Germany.
</p>

<p>
The first thing to be done was to facilitate references
by numbering the lines of Massinger's plays;<note place='foot'>It is much to be wished that someone would essay the
same task for Beaumont and Fletcher, though there the work
would be less easy, partly from the looseness of the metres,
partly from the corruption of the text, but chiefly from the
presence of prose-passages bordering on verse.</note> the next
was to investigate once more the facts of his life, and to
correlate them with the period in which he lived; the
third was to read typical plays of the period, so as to
arrive at a just estimate of our author.
</p>

<p>
His life will not detain us long. We know far less of
him than we do of Shakspere. None of his sayings have
been preserved to us; hardly any incidents of his career.
His father was house-steward to two of the Earls of
<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>
Pembroke, first to Henry Herbert, then to William Herbert,<note place='foot'>A. à Wood's <hi rend='italic'>Fasti Oxonienses</hi>, p. 313.</note>
Shakspere's friend. The elder Massinger was a Fellow
of Merton College, Oxford, and for several years a Member
of Parliament. Philip Massinger, the dramatist, was born
at Salisbury in 1584. In 1602 he went up to St. Alban's
Hall, Oxford, where his father had been an undergraduate.
We are told by A. à Wood that he went at Lord Pembroke's
expense, but that he did not work hard at the
University, and took no degree.<note place='foot'>Herein he resembled F. Beaumont. G. Langbaine, on
the other hand, says that the Earl sent Massinger to Oxford,
where he <q>closely pursued his studies.</q> But we must be
careful how we believe Langbaine; his account of our poet
begins thus: <q>This author was born at Salisbury, in the reign
of King Charles the First, being son to Philip Massinger, a
gentleman belonging to the Earl of Montgomery.</q> Here are
three gross blunders at once.</note> In or after the year 1606
he seems to have gone to London, and to have speedily
engaged in the work of writing plays.<note place='foot'>Boyle (<hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, xxi., p. 472) says that <q>Massinger's
inveterate habit of repeating himself arose probably from his
profession as an actor.</q> I know of no evidence for this hypothesis.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>, however, p. 6, note 1.</note> The wide reading
which his plays presuppose probably began at Oxford.
</p>

<p>
It was the custom in those days, as in the time of
Plautus at Rome,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Mommsen's <hi rend='italic'>History of Rome</hi>, English translation,
vol. ii., p. 440.</note> for playwrights to revise old plays;
and still more was it usual for them to collaborate.<note place='foot'>Thus in the play of <hi rend='italic'>Lady Jane</hi>, of which <hi rend='italic'>The Famous
History of Sir T. Wyatt</hi> is a fragment, we find five authors
concerned. It will be remembered that Eupolis contributed
to the <hi rend='italic'>Knights</hi> of Aristophanes.</note> We
find Massinger at work in this way with Field,<note place='foot'>For some account of Field see Appendix XI.</note> Daborne,<note place='foot'>Daborne's letters bulk large in the Henslowe Correspondence.
We have two plays of his: <hi rend='italic'>A Christian turn'd Turke</hi>,
based on the story of the pirate Ward; and <hi rend='italic'>The Poor Man's
Comfort</hi>, a tragi-comedy. Like Marston, he abandoned the
stage in middle life and took orders, before 1618. It is therefore
unlikely that he collaborated with Massinger in any of
the plays which we possess.</note>
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
Dekker, Tourneur, and above all, with Fletcher. With
the latter he worked from 1613 to 1623. In that year,
for some unknown reason, he seceded from the service
of the leading company of actors of the day, who went
by the name of the King's men, and wrote unaided three
plays for the Queen's men, <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The
Bondman</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>. After Fletcher's death,
in 1625, Massinger rejoined the King's men, and wrote
for them until his death in 1640.
</p>

<p>
It has been surmised from the vivid colouring of <hi rend='italic'>The
Virgin Martyr</hi><note place='foot'><p>Such a reference to <hi rend='italic'>Acta Sanctorum</hi> as is contained
in these lines might be made by an Anglican:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Antoninus</hi>.      It may be, the duty<lb/>
And loyal service, with which I pursued her,<lb/>
And sealed it with my death, will be remember'd<lb/>
Among her blessed <hi rend='italic'>actions</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>V. M.</hi>, IV., 3, 28.
</p>
<p>
More stress might be laid on the metaphor contained in
these lines:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Theophilus</hi>. O! mark it, therefore, and with that attention,
As you would hear an embassy from heaven,
<hi rend='italic'>By a wing'd legate</hi>.&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>V. M.</hi>, V., 2, 103.</p></note> and the plot of <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>,<note place='foot'>No doubt it required courage to present a Jesuit in this
way so soon after Gunpowder Plot; and the curious argument
in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, V., 1, 28-41, in favour of lay-baptism
certainly shows a mind interested in ecclesiastical problems.</note> where a
Jesuit plays a leading part and is portrayed in a pleasing
light, that Massinger turned Roman Catholic. The evidence
for this theory is quite inadequate. Indeed, we
might as well argue from Gazet's language that the
author followed the Anglican <foreign rend='italic'>via media</foreign>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, I., 1, 24-32.</note> Plots derived
from French, Spanish, and Italian sources would naturally
contain Roman Catholic machinery. We might as well
infer that Shakspere was a Roman Catholic because
Silvia goes to Friar Patrick's cell,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Two Gentlemen of Verona</hi>, V., 1.</note> or because Friar
Laurence is prominent in <hi rend='italic'>Romeo and Juliet</hi>.<note place='foot'>Friar Paulo takes an important part in <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of
Honour</hi>, ad finem. Octavio, disguised as a priest, elicits
Alonzo's repentance in <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, IV., 2. The same
expedient occurs in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>, V., 3, where
Theodosius, disguised as a friar, convinces himself of his
wife's innocence. Shakspere disguises the Duke as a friar
in <hi rend='italic'>Measure for Measure</hi>, II., 3, III., 1, 2, IV., 1, 2, 3.</note>
</p>

<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>

<p>
We know that Massinger lived a life of comparative
poverty; on one occasion we find him, with two other
dramatic authors, asking for a loan of £5.<note place='foot'><p>See the photograph at the beginning of the book. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also
Greg's Henslowe Papers, article 68. Fleay identifies the
play referred to in the document as <hi rend='italic'>The Honest Man of
Fortune</hi>, acted in 1613. In the first Dublin poem, after
referring to the patronage which had befriended Jonson and
Fletcher, Massinger goes on thus:
</p>
<p>
<q>These are precedents<lb/>
I cite with reverence; my low intents<lb/>
Look not so high; yet some work I might frame<lb/>
That should not wrong my duty, nor your name;<lb/>
Were but your lordship pleased to cast an eye<lb/>
Of favour on my trod-down poverty.</q>
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
The person who thus obliged the three writers was
Philip Henslowe, a dyer, theatrical lessee, and speculator,
who acted as a kind of broker between actors and authors,
buying from the one and selling to the other; we still
possess his diary, containing information as to the prices
which he gave for plays.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> W. W. Greg's <hi rend='italic'>Henslowe's Diary</hi>, vol. ii., pp. 110-147.
Mr. Greg points out (p. 113) that <q>there is no record of any
speculations of Henslowe's own as far as the evidence of the
Diary is concerned. The accounts are company accounts</q>&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
of The Rose and Fortune Theatres.
</p>
<p>
We have also at Dulwich a bond from R. Daborne and
P. Massinger to Philip Henslowe for payment of £3, dated
July 4th, 1615. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Greg's Henslowe Papers, article 102.</p></note> The prologue of <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>
shows us that for two years before 1633 Massinger had
been under a cloud, and had abstained from writing.
Two of his plays had failed in 1631&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the
East</hi><note place='foot'>Licensed March 4th, 1631.</note> and <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi><note place='foot'>Licensed May 6th, 1631.</note>&mdash;so he appears to have
put forth his full strength in <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>.
</p>

<p rend='text-align: center'>
  <figure url='images/sample.png' rend='width: 70%'>
    <figDesc>Henslow document at Dulwich.</figDesc>
  </figure>
</p>

<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>

<p>
The dedications of Massinger's plays which have been
preserved show that he was often dependent for support
on the leaders of what he once or twice calls <q>the
nobility.</q><note place='foot'>See poem <q>Sero sed serio</q> (Cunningham, p. 628);
<hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 2, 37; <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, I., 2, 116; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the
East</hi>, II., 1, 45. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Catiline</hi>; II, 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
The connexion of the poet with the family of which his
father was the loyal and trusted servant has been exaggerated
by some;<note place='foot'>Aubrey, in his <hi rend='italic'>Natural History of Wiltshire</hi> (ed. J. Britton,
1847, p. 31), distinctly says that the poet had a pension of
twenty or thirty pounds per annum, which was <q>payed to
his wife after his decease.</q></note> in the dedication of <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>,
written in 1623, to Philip, Earl of Montgomery,<note place='foot'>Younger brother of William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke.</note> the poet
distinctly states that though the Earl had helped the
play at its first performance by his <q>liberal suffrages</q>
yet he was personally unknown to him.<note place='foot'>The dedication begins thus: <q>However I could never
arrive at the happiness to be made known to your lordship,</q>
etc.</note> Amongst others
to whom we find dedications is George Harding, Baron
Berkeley, to whom Webster inscribed <hi rend='italic'>The Duchess of
Malfi</hi>. It is pleasant to read in the dedication of <hi rend='italic'>The
Picture</hi> <q>to my honoured and selected friends of the
Noble Society of the Inner Temple</q> that Massinger
received <q>frequent bounties</q> from them.
</p>

<p>
The plays give us no clear evidence that Massinger ever
travelled abroad,<note place='foot'><p>No doubt he knew some foreign languages. His plays
come from various sources, French, Italian, and Spanish, some
of which, however, had been translated into English. <hi rend='italic'>The
Renegado</hi> is traceable to a comedy of Cervantes, <hi rend='italic'>Los Baños de
Argel</hi>, printed in 1615. <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi> is derived
from a French translation of Zonaras. If, which is doubtful,
<hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi> owes anything to Guicciardini, his history
had appeared in an English translation by Sir Geoffrey
Fenton in 1579. Fleay has a curious theory that where
French scenes are found in Fletcher they are due to Massinger.
</p>
<p>
Much interesting information on the great debt which
Fletcher and other dramatists owed to Spanish literature will
be found in F. E. Schelling's <hi rend='italic'>Elizabethan Drama</hi>, vol. ii.,
pp. 205-218 and 530. Schelling comes to the conclusion
that Fletcher did not know Spanish; but he quotes an unpublished
dictum of his friend Dr. Rosenbach, who holds it as
certain that Massinger knew Spanish. <hi rend='italic'>The Island Princess</hi>
is based on a Spanish play, of which no translation is known,
<hi rend='italic'>Conquista de las islas Malucas</hi>, by De Argensola, 1609. Rosenbach
attributes the play to Massinger! It is clear, however,
that a translation may have been in circulation from which
Fletcher took his materials, or somebody may have seen the
play acted in Spain, and reported it to him. Further, <hi rend='italic'>Love's
Cure</hi> is based on the <hi rend='italic'>Comedia de la Fuerza de la Costumbre</hi>, by
Guillen De Castro, licensed at Valencia, February 7th, 1625,
and published three months later. Fletcher died in August,
1625, and Stiefel thinks that he read Spanish, and that this
is his last work. Rosenbach and Bullen assign the play to
Massinger (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Appendix III., No. 29). It is highly desirable
that the grounds which led Rosenbach to believe that Massinger
knew Spanish should be made public.</p></note> though such a passage as <hi rend='italic'>The Great
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
Duke of Florence</hi>, II., 2, 5-21, rather suggests a visit to
Italy. Nor have we any ground for supposing that he
was, like Shakspere, an actor, unless indeed an obscure
reference in the Dublin poem to the Earl of Pembroke be
so interpreted.<note place='foot'><p>Lines 39-45 run thus:
</p>
<p>
Let them write well that do this, and in grace.<lb/>
I would not for a pension or a place<lb/>
Part so with over candour: let me rather<lb/>
Live poorly on those toys I would not father;<lb/>
Not known beyond a player or a man,<lb/>
That does pursue the course that I have ran.<lb/>
Ere so grow famous.
</p>
<p>
Lines 41-42 are interesting as seeming to hint that Massinger
preferred to waive publicity as to his collaboration with
Fletcher and others. The poem was published by A. B.
Grosart in <hi rend='italic'>Englische Studien</hi>, xxvi., pp. 1-7, and will be found
with the original spelling and punctuation in <ref target='Appendix_XVII'>Appendix XVII</ref>.</p></note> In London he lived on the Bankside,
Southwark. The story of his death is told us by our
gossiping old friend Anthony à Wood, in his <hi rend='italic'>Athenae
Oxonienses</hi>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A. O.</hi>, ii., 654-656. A. à Wood includes in the list of
Massinger's plays <hi rend='italic'>Powerful Favourite, or the Life of Sejanus</hi>.
As Massinger was but nineteen in 1603 he cannot have been
the <q>happy genius</q> referred to in the address <q>to the
readers</q> of Ben Jonson's play. For the explanation of the
mistaken attribution of <hi rend='italic'>The Powerful Favourite</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> Appendix
XIV.</note> Massinger went to bed one night well, and
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
was found dead the next morning. He was buried at St.
Saviour's on March 18th, 1639/40.<note place='foot'>Gifford was right as to the date and Cunningham wrong.
The entry in question is as follows: <q>March 18th, 1639
[<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, old style], Philip Massenger, a stranger.</q> The entry
about Fletcher runs thus: <q>Aug. 29, 1625, John Ffletcher
[sic], a man, in the church.</q> Entries such as <q>a man,</q> <q>a
boy,</q> <q>a girl</q> are not unusual in the book, and the practice
of burial <q>in the church</q> was comparatively common
at the time.</note> The funeral was
<q>accompanied by comedians,</q> a phrase which seems to
show that his professional friends did him honour at the
last; he is described in the monthly accounts of St.
Saviour's as <q>a stranger</q>&mdash;that is to say, a non-parishioner.
His intimate friend Sir Aston Cokaine tells us
that he shared the grave of his friend John Fletcher;<note place='foot'>The stone inscribed with his name in the chancel of
St. Saviour's does not mark the place of his burial, which
is unknown.</note>
and in 1896 a window in the south aisle of the nave of
Southwark Cathedral was unveiled in his honour by Sir
Walter Besant.<note place='foot'>By a charming if undesigned coincidence the Massinger
window stands next to that of Shakspere. It represents two
scenes from <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, and, unfortunately, repeats
the erroneous date (1639) of the poet's death, and gives 1583
as the year of his birth.</note>
</p>

<p>
What was the atmosphere in which Massinger lived?
The days of James I. and Charles I. were less heroic than
those of Elizabeth. In foreign politics England intervened
once or twice in an ineffective way, and a good
deal of sympathy was shown, much of it in a practical
fashion, for the cause of the Protestant King of Bohemia.
Gardiner<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contemporary Review</hi>, August, 1876.</note> has pointed out that Charles I. gave permission
to the Marquis of Hamilton to carry over volunteers
in aid of Gustavus Adolphus just as James I. had allowed
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
Vere to carry over volunteers to the Palatinate. Hamilton
sailed in July, 1631, and <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi> was
printed in 1632. The whole plot of this play recalls the
relations of England to the Protestant cause on the
Continent. Thus, William. Lord Craven, to whom Ford's
<hi rend='italic'>Broken Heart</hi> is dedicated, and who was knighted at the
age of seventeen, after his <q>valiant adventures</q> in the
Netherlands under Henry, Prince of Orange, went to the
assistance of Gustavus Adolphus in 1631, when only
twenty-two years old.
</p>

<p>
Wars in the Low Countries are vaguely referred to in
various passages, as, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>:<note place='foot'>II., 2, 140.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Novall Jun.</hi> Oh, fie upon him, how he wears his clothes!</l>
<l>As if he had come this Xmas. from S. Omer's</l>
<l>To see his friends, and return'd after Twelfth-tide.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The date of the play is uncertain, but it must have been
written some considerable time before being printed in
1632.<note place='foot'>Intercourse with the Low Countries is referred to in the
<hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi> (I., 2, 75). The monastery to which Sir John
Frugal retires is at <q>Lovain</q> (<hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, III., 2, 58).
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also for the University of <q>Lovain</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Elder Brother</hi>,
II., 1.</note> In <hi rend='italic'>The New Way to pay Old Debts</hi> Lord Lovell <q>has
purchas'd a fair name in the wars.</q><note place='foot'><p>III., 1, 38. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Frank Wellborn's petition, V., 1,
<foreign rend='italic'>ad finem</foreign>. Compare the part played in <hi rend='italic'>Sir John Barnavelt</hi> by
the English mercenaries in Holland; and especially IV., 2.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Orange.</hi> I have sent patents out for the choicest companies<lb/>
Hither to be remov'd, first Colonel Vere's<lb/>
From Dort, next Sir Charles Morgan's, a stout Company.
</p>
<p>
IV., 3. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Barnavelt</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>to his daughter</hi>):
</p>
<p>
What! wouldst thou have a husband?<lb/>
Go marry an English Captain, and he'll teach thee<lb/>
How to defy thy father and his fortune.
</p>
<p>
II., 1. <hi rend='smallcaps'>Barnavelt</hi>:
</p>
<p>
But have you tried by any means (it skills not<lb/>
How much you promise) to win th' old soldier<lb/>
(The English Companies in chief I aim at)<lb/>
To stand firm for us?
</p></note> In <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi>, we have the
familiar type of the brave soldier who is disregarded in
time of peace, and has come down to poverty and old
clothes.
</p>

<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>

<p>
In the wider world of Europe the Turk and the Algerine
pirate are still grim realities enough to form an effective
scenic background.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, I., 1, 243, 278; <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>,
I., 2, 62; II., 1, 145; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 1, 3-5; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, II., 1, 84;
V., 4, 160; <hi rend='italic'>Very Woman</hi>, V., 5, 28. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> in Marlowe, <hi rend='italic'>Tamburlaine</hi>,
Pt. I., III., 3; Pt. II., I., 2; <hi rend='italic'>Jew of Malta</hi>, I., 1;
II. 2. For a Christian pirate <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Decameron</hi>, II. 4.</note> Indeed, it was not so very long
since the Battle of Lepanto. We find constant references
to galley-slaves,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, IV., 3, 77; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, IV., 1, 99-102; II., 6, 32.</note> to the slave market,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, III., 1.</note> and to
apostates to Islam.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>.</note> In the opening scene of <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>
the soldier husband parts from his wife on the frontier
of Bohemia <q>not distant from the Turkish camp above
five leagues.</q> One of the objections urged against the
new custom of fighting duels is that thereby lives are
lost which might have done service against the Turk.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, II., 1, 84. Similarly in <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>,
V., 3, 110, Matilda warns Lorenzo that <q>Heaven's liberal
hand</q> has designed him to fight rather against the Turk than
a Christian neighbour-king. Compare <hi rend='italic'>The Devil's Law-case</hi>
(p. 138<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>).
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ercole.</hi>      When our bloods<lb/>
Embrac'd each other, then I pitied<lb/>
That so much valour should be hazarded<lb/>
On the fortune of a single rapier<lb/>
And not spent against the Turk.
</p></note>
The age of chivalry has its faint reflection in schemes to
<q>redeem Christian slaves chain'd in the Turkish servitude</q>
by force of arms, and in the prowess of the Knights of
Malta.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, II., 5, 24 and 64-73. Bertoldo, the Knight
of Malta, is the hero of <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also
Fletcher's play of that name; and <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, V., 4, 143-145.</note> The wealth and power of Turkey are taken for
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
granted. When Malefort senior vows vengeance on Montreville,
he cries out:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The Turkish Empire offer'd for his ransom</l>
<l>Should not redeem his life.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, V., 2, 230. We find a similar emphasis
on the Turk and pirates in Webster's <hi rend='italic'>White Devil</hi> and<hi rend='italic'> Devil's
Law-case</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
At home we find the vices of a prolonged peace lending
opportunity for some easy satire. On the whole, we
may say that we do not learn very much about our
country from the poet which we could not find in the
other playwrights of the day. Let us rapidly put together
some of his references. There were two Englands
at this time, drifting inevitably apart, only to clash in
fratricidal war under Charles I. The drama was becoming
less and less national, more and more an affair of
aristocratic patronage. Massinger does not often refer
to the Puritans;<note place='foot'>The <q>zealous coblers</q> and <q>learned botchers</q> who
preach at Amsterdam are mentioned in <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, I., 1, 30-32.
In <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi>, III., 1, 75, the <q>Hugonots</q> are
referred to as using the word <q>mortified.</q> <q>Geneva print</q>
is mentioned in <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, I., 1, 11; <q>precisians</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, I., 1, 6, use the word <q>verity.</q></note> there is nothing so amusing in his plays
as the passage in Fletcher's <hi rend='italic'>Fair Maid of the Inn</hi>, where
the Pedant solicits the advice of Forobosco the quack
about <q>erecting four new sects of religion at Amsterdam.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Fair Maid</hi>, IV., 2.</note>
The fashionable love of astrology is satirized
in <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>. The England of Massinger's plays
is an England which loves expense,<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Very Woman</hi>, III., 1, 124:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Merchant.</hi> They have a city, Sir&mdash;I have been in it.<lb/>
And therefore dare affirm it&mdash;where if you saw<lb/>
With what a load of vanity 'tis fraughted,<lb/>
How like an everlasting morris-dance it looks,<lb/>
Nothing but hobby-horse and Maid Marian,<lb/>
You would start indeed.
</p></note> amusements, Greek
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
wines,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Old Law</hi>, IV., 1, 20; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, III., 2, 169; <hi rend='italic'>Very Woman</hi>,
III., 5, 29 and 70; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, I., 3, 74. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Decameron</hi>, II. 5.</note> masques,<note place='foot'>For the influence of the masque on Massinger, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>,
II., 2; <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, V., 3; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, IV., 2.</note> new clothes,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> the characters of Simonides in <hi rend='italic'>The Old Law</hi> and
young Novall in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>, II., 2; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>,
I., 2, 21; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 2, 29-36; <hi rend='italic'>Very Woman</hi>, III., 1, 131-2.
Compare also <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII.</hi>, I., 3.</note> and foreign fashions.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, III., 1, 57; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, II., 1, 81. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Merchant
of Venice</hi>, I., 2, 78-81; <hi rend='italic'>As You Like It</hi>, IV., 1, 34-40.</note>
London is a great port, with trade to the Indies and
aspirations after the <q>North passage.</q> The jealousy of
the City and the Court, the ostentations of the one and
the refinement of the other, point the moral of <hi rend='italic'>The City
Madam</hi>.<note place='foot'><p>The play ends thus:
</p>
<p>
Make you good<lb/>
Your promised reformation, and instruct<lb/>
Our city dames, whom wealth makes proud, to move<lb/>
In their own spheres, and willingly to confess,<lb/>
In their habits, manners, and their highest port,<lb/>
A distance 'twixt the city and the court.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, III., 1, 84; <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, III., 2,
153; IV., 4, 43; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, II., 1, 81 and 88. In <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>,
I., 2, distinctions are drawn between the county ladies, the city
dames, and the court ladies of England. Compare also
the epilogue to <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>:
</p>
<p>
Others, to hear the city<lb/>
Abused extremely, and to cry <q>that's witty.</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rape of Lucrece</hi>, II., 1; II., 3; <hi rend='italic'>The Devil is an Ass</hi>, III., 1;
<hi rend='italic'>Westward Ho!</hi> I., 1; <q>I tell thee, there is equality enough
between a lady and a city dame if their hair be but of a
colour.</q> Ford contrasts the ladies of the city and the court
in <hi rend='italic'>The Broken Heart</hi>, II., 1. In Dekker's <hi rend='italic'>Shoemaker's Holiday</hi>,
I., 1, the Lord Mayor says:
</p>
<p>
Too mean is my poor girl for his high birth,<lb/>
Poor citizens must not with courtiers wed.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>A Chaste Maid in Cheapside</hi>, I., 1:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Maudlin.</hi> Besides, you have a presence, sweet Sir Walter,<lb/>
Able to dance a maid brought up in the city;<lb/>
A brave court-spirit makes our virgins quiver.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Eastward Ho!</hi> deals with the same contrast. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also the
Induction to <hi rend='italic'>The Knight of the Burning Pestle</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>, IV., 5;
Induction to <hi rend='italic'>Four Plays in One</hi>.</p></note> The high-spirited 'prentices of the City of
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
London take the law into their own hands in days when
there are no police,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, I., 3, 92-94; <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, I., 2, 34. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Henry
VIII.</hi>, V., 4; <hi rend='italic'>Shoemaker's Holiday</hi>, V., 2; <hi rend='italic'>The Honest Whore</hi>,
Pt. I., III., 1; <hi rend='italic'>Sir Thomas More</hi>, II., 1.</note> and their vices are satirized after
the manner of Ben Jonson in the same play. Horse-play,
such as tossing in a blanket, is considered a great joke.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, IV., 5, 12; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, II., 1, 142.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Epicoene</hi>, V., 1 <hi rend='italic'>bis</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Elder Brother</hi>, IV., 3; <hi rend='italic'>Honest Man's
Fortune</hi>, V., 3; <hi rend='italic'>Thierry and Theodoret</hi>, II., 3.</note>
The balladmonger so often referred to in Shakspere is
much in evidence,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, III., 3, 35; IV., 2, 35; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of
Love</hi>, IV., 5, 125, 126; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, V., 3, 245-252; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>,
III., 3, 8; <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, IV., 1, 74; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, III., 2,
18. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>1 Henry IV.</hi>, II., 2, 49; III., 1, 130; <hi rend='italic'>2 Henry IV.</hi>, IV.,
3, 52-54; <hi rend='italic'>Winter's Tale</hi>, IV., 3, 181-263; V., 2, 25-27; <hi rend='italic'>Antony
and Cleopatra</hi>, V., 2, 215; <hi rend='italic'>Queen of Corinth</hi>, III., 1; <hi rend='italic'>Spanish
Curate</hi>, IV., 7; <hi rend='italic'>False One</hi>, I., 1; <hi rend='italic'>Elder Brother</hi>, IV., 4; <hi rend='italic'>The
White Devil</hi>, p. 23b; <hi rend='italic'>The Devil's Law-case</hi>, pp. 131<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> and 143<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Love's Sacrifice</hi>, III., 1; IV., 1; <hi rend='italic'>The Honest Whore</hi>, Pt. I, I., 1;
<hi rend='italic'>Bartholomew Fair</hi>, Induction; II., 1; and III., 1; <hi rend='italic'>Rape of
Lucrece</hi>, II., 1; <hi rend='italic'>Edward II.</hi>, II., 2; <hi rend='italic'>Orlando Furioso</hi>, IV., 1;
<hi rend='italic'>George a Greene</hi>, IV., 2; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Bees</hi>, ch. v.</note> though indeed it was an age in which
everyone wrote poetry.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, II., 4, 1. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Much Ado about Nothing</hi>, V.,1, 295-297;
<hi rend='italic'>A King and No King</hi>, I., 2; IV., 2; <hi rend='italic'>Four Plays in One</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Triumph of Love</hi>, 4; <hi rend='italic'>Little French Lawyer</hi>, III., 2; <hi rend='italic'>The False
One</hi>, III., 2; IV., 3; <hi rend='italic'>Lover's Progress</hi>, I., 1; III., 4; V., 3;
<hi rend='italic'>Cupid's Revenge</hi>, II., 4; <hi rend='italic'>James IV.</hi>, 1, 2.</note> In rural England we find the
possibility of an unscrupulous local tyrant, such as is
depicted to us in Massinger's masterpiece, Sir Giles
Overreach, aided by his jackal, Mr. Justice Greedy.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, especially II., 1; for the difficulty of getting
justice done for the poor, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, I., 1; <hi rend='italic'>Fatal
Dowry</hi>, I., 1, especially lines 67-80.</note> That
our poet had a keen eye for social evils, for the man who
sells food at famine prices, the encloser of commons, the
usurer, the worker of iron, the cheating tradesman, is
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
clear from a passage in <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>.<note place='foot'><p>II.; 4, 79-106. The reference to the mills is as follows:
</p>
<p>
Builders of iron mills, that grub up forests<lb/>
With timber trees for shipping.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Volpone</hi>, I., 1, 33-36.</p></note> The beautiful
description in the same play of the amusements of country
life, the hunting and the hawking, with which Durazzo
seeks to console his love-sick ward Caldoro,<note place='foot'>I., 1, 290-340.</note> probably
takes one back to Massinger's own boyhood in Wiltshire.
As we should expect, there is a good deal of riding in the
country scenes.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>The New Way</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>.</note> The characters of Sir John Frugal, the
successful merchant, and Mr. Plenty, the country gentleman,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>City Madam.</hi></note>
show us that the <q>John Bull</q> type of Englishman
existed in those days.
</p>

<p>
The temptation to give a back-hand blow to one's own
country in the course of a plot laid abroad is obvious and
irresistible; where Shakspere had set the example others
were sure to follow,<note place='foot'>Thus Ford, in an interesting passage in <hi rend='italic'>Love's Sacrifice</hi>,
I., 1, refers to the national love of self-depreciation among the
English. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Rape of Lucrece</hi>, III., 5.</note> and Massinger does not spare the
female sex of England. To judge by the passage in <hi rend='italic'>The
Renegado</hi>,<note place='foot'>I., 2, 22-49. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Very Woman</hi>, III., 1, 133-135;
and Webster's <hi rend='italic'>Westward Ho!</hi> I., 1, and III., 3.</note> the women of his day loved expense and
luxury, and were very independent in their attitude to
their husbands.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Honest Whore</hi>, Pt. II., IV., 1:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Matheo.</hi> England is the only hell for horses, and only
paradise for women. Also Lamira's words in <hi rend='italic'>The Honest
Man's Fortune</hi>, III., 3.</p></note> The humiliation of Lady Frugal and
her two daughters after their extravagant ambitions is
the point of <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>. The contrast between a
uxorious husband and an imperious wife is one of Massinger's
favourite effects.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>. The Duke
of <q>Pavy</q> in Ford's <hi rend='italic'>Love's Sacrifice</hi> is a slighter sketch of
the same type. The worthlessness of Bianca in the same
play is a measure of the moral gap between Massinger and
Ford.</note> Donusa's speech in her own
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
defence in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi> might have been written by a
suffragette of our own day.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, IV., 2, 116-143.</note>
</p>

<p>
We do not get much direct evidence as to the characteristics
of the playwright's audiences; Dr. Bradley has
some good remarks on this subject.<note place='foot'>Oxford Lectures on Poetry, pp. 363-365. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also pp.
392-3.</note> <q>Nor is it credible
that an appreciation of the best things was denied to
the mob, which doubtless loved what we should despise;
but appears also to have admired what we admire, and to
have tolerated more poetry than most of us can stomach;</q>
<q>the mass of the audience must have liked excitement,
the open exhibition of violent and bloody deeds, and the
intermixture of seriousness and mirth.</q> Dr. Bradley
points out elsewhere<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> op. cit., p. 381. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Prologue to <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII.</hi>, line 13;
Prologue to <hi rend='italic'>Romeo and Juliet</hi>, line 12, and Chorus to Act I.
in <hi rend='italic'>The Mayor of Queensborough</hi>.
</p>
<p>
If all my powers<lb/>
Can win the grace of two poor hours,<lb/>
Well apaid I go to rest.
</p>
<p>
Also Prologues to <hi rend='italic'>Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>, lines 28, 29; <hi rend='italic'>Alchemist</hi>,
line 1; <hi rend='italic'>Love's Pilgrimage</hi>, line 8; <hi rend='italic'>Lover's Progress</hi>, line 18
(<q><hi rend='italic'>three</hi> short hours</q>); and Shirley's Preface to the Folio of
Beaumont and Fletcher.</p></note> that the Elizabethan actor probably
spoke more rapidly than our modern actors. This would
make soliloquies less tedious.
</p>

<p>
To turn to the politics of the age; the rift between the
dynasty and the nation grew wider as the century advanced.
Though Massinger died before the days of the
Long Parliament, we can imagine that he would have
been one of those who eventually fought under protest
for the King. We find evidence in his plays for supposing
that he belonged to the Conservative Opposition, like his
patron Philip, the fourth Earl of Pembroke and Montgomery.
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
He was a lover of liberty, and there are one or
two indications that his plays offended the strict ideas
of Charles I.'s censorship.
</p>

<p>
Sir Henry Herbert, the Master of the Revels, refused
on January 11th, 1630/31, to license one of his plays<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Malone's <hi rend='italic'>Shakspere</hi> (edition 1790), vol. i., pt. 2, p. 226.
<hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi> probably represents an adaptation of this
play, with classical names and setting substituted for the
original plot. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <ref target='Appendix_VII'>Appendix VII</ref>.</note>
because <q>it did contain dangerous matter, as the deposing
of Sebastian King of Portugal by Philip II., and there
being a peace sworn 'twixt the Kings of England and
Spain.</q><note place='foot'>Chapman had to suppress a considerable part of <hi rend='italic'>The
Tragedy of Byron</hi>, which referred to quite recent events in
France. But the censorship seems to have become much
more stringent in Massinger's days.</note> The same worthy records that King Charles I.
himself read another of his plays,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The King and the Subject</hi>; now lost. The play was performed,
after alterations had been made, under another title.
Sir H. Herbert wrote, <q>Received of Mr. Lowen's for my paines
about Massinger's play called <hi rend='italic'>The King and the Subject</hi>, 2nd
June, 1638, £1.</q></note> while staying at Newmarket,
and wrote against one passage, <q>This is too
insolent, and to be changed.</q> The passage, which is put
into the mouth of a King of Spain, runs as follows:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Monies! we'll raise supplies what way we please</l>
<l>And force you to subscribe to blanks, in which</l>
<l>We'll mulct you, as we think fit. The Caesars</l>
<l>In Rome were wise, acknowledging no laws</l>
<l>But what their swords did ratify; the wives</l>
<l>And daughters of the senators bowing to</l>
<l>Their will as deities.<note place='foot'>Malone's <hi rend='italic'>Shakspere</hi> (ed. 1790), vol. i., pt. 2, p. 235.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
These lines clearly reflect on the autocratic methods
which prevailed in England from 1629 to 1640.
</p>

<p>
There is much in Timoleon's speeches in the senate<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I., 3.</note>
which seems to contain covert references to the England
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
of the day, and notably in lines 203-213, where the unprepared
state of the army and navy is referred to.
</p>

<p>
It has been thought with much probability that the
Duke of Buckingham is satirized in the slight sketch of
Gisco in <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>,<note place='foot'>I., 1, 49-56. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, I., 1, 75-84.
Sanazarro is one of the better type of favourites.</note> and in the more fully drawn
character of Fulgentio in <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi>:<note place='foot'>I., 1, 23-36.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Adorni.</hi> Pray you, sir, what is he?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Astutio.</hi> A gentleman, yet no lord. He hath some drops</l>
<l>Of the king's blood running in his reins, derived</l>
<l>Some ten degrees off. His revenue lies</l>
<l>In a narrow compass, the king's ear; and yields him</l>
<l>Every hour a fruitful harvest. Men may talk</l>
<l>Of three crops in a year in the Fortunate Islands,</l>
<l>Or profit made by wool; but, while there are suitors,</l>
<l>His sheepshearing, nay, shaving to the quick</l>
<l>Is in every quarter of the moon, and constant.</l>
<l>In the time of trussing a point, he can undo</l>
<l>Or make a man; his play or recreation</l>
<l>Is to raise this up, or pull down that, and though</l>
<l>He never yet took orders, makes more bishops</l>
<l>In Sicily than the Pope himself.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The grumbling of the professional soldier against the
royal favourite inspires a passage in <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>.<note place='foot'>III., 1, 10-17.</note>
A similar freedom of speech is found in <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of
Honour</hi>; for instance, in the following passages:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gasparo.</hi>      When you know what 'tis,</l>
<l>You will think otherwise; no less will do it</l>
<l>Than fifty thousand crowns.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Camiola.</hi>             A pretty sum,</l>
<l>The price weighed with the purchase; fifty thousand!</l>
<l>To the king 'tis nothing. He that can spare more</l>
<l>To his minion for a masque, cannot but ransom</l>
<l>Such a brother at a million.<note place='foot'>III., 3, 135.</note></l>
</lg>

<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Camiola.</hi>    With your leave, I must not kneel, sir,</l>
<l>While I reply to this, but thus rise up</l>
<l>In my defence, and tell you, as a man</l>
<l>(Since, when you are unjust, the deity,</l>
<l>Which you may challenge as a king, parts from you,)</l>
<l>'Twas never read in holy writ, or moral,</l>
<l>That subjects on their loyalty, were obliged</l>
<l>To love their sovereign's vices; your grace, sir,</l>
<l>To such an undeserver is no virtue.<note place='foot'>IV., 5, 52. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, I., 1, 73-84.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
There are also passages in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>
which seem to attack the Government of the day and its
agents.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> especially the offer made by the Informer to Paulinus,
I., 2, 69-89.</note> I will quote the chief of these as a specimen of
honest indignation:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Pulcheria.</hi>               How I abuse</l>
<l>This precious time! Projector, I treat first</l>
<l>Of you and your disciples; you roar out,</l>
<l>All is the king's, his will above his laws;</l>
<l>And that fit tributes are too gentle yokes</l>
<l>For his poor subjects; whispering in his ear,</l>
<l>If he would have their fear, no man should dare</l>
<l>To bring a salad from his country garden,</l>
<l>Without the paying gabel; kill a hen,</l>
<l>Without excise; and that if he desire</l>
<l>To have his children or his servants wear</l>
<l>Their heads upon their shoulders, you affirm</l>
<l>In policy 'tis fit the owner should</l>
<l>Pay for them by the poll<note place='foot'>1st quarto, <q>pole.</q></note>; or, if the prince wants</l>
<l>A present sum he may command a city</l>
<l>Impossibilities, and for non-performance</l>
<l>Compel it to submit to any fine</l>
<l>His officers shall impose. Is this the way</l>
<l>To make our emperor happy? Can the groans</l>
<l>Of his subjects yield him music? Must his thoughts</l>
<l>Be wash'd with widows' and wrong'd orphans' tears,</l>
<l>Or his power grow contemptible?<note place='foot'>I., 2, 236-257.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>

<p>
The Englishman's love of liberty inspires a vigorous
speech delivered by the British slave in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin
Martyr</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV., 1, 136-147.</note>
</p>

<p>
Further, the impatience which Englishmen felt from
time to time at the poor part played by their country in
the Thirty Years' War is reflected in <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi>.
Bertoldo there gets leave from the King of Sicily to go to
help the beleaguered Duke of Urbin. He is, however,
disavowed by the crafty, peace-loving king. In the
debate Bertoldo describes Sicily in language which might
easily be applied to England, and then proceeds in an
eloquent passage to refer to England's glorious naval
tradition in the past:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bertoldo.</hi>                   If examples</l>
<l>May move you more than arguments, look on England,</l>
<l>The empress of the European isles,</l>
<l>And unto whom alone ours yields precedence:</l>
<l>When did she flourish so, as when she was</l>
<l>The mistress of the ocean, her navies</l>
<l>Putting a girdle round about the world?</l>
<l>When the Iberian quaked, her worthies named;</l>
<l>And the fair flower-de-luce grew pale, set by</l>
<l>The red rose and the white! Let not our armour</l>
<l>Hung up, or our unrigg'd Armada make us</l>
<l>Ridiculous to the late poor snakes, our neighbours,</l>
<l>Warm'd in our bosoms, and to whom again</l>
<l>We may be terrible.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 220-233.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here, at any rate, Massinger differs from Shakspere,
who makes no reference to the exploits of our sailors;
indeed, it would seem that, like Trafalgar, the defeat of
the Armada had no significance for its own generation.<note place='foot'>Middleton refers to <q>the great Armada</q> in <hi rend='italic'>A Trick to
Catch the Old One</hi>, III., 4; Dampit: <q>In Anno '88, when the
great Armada was coming.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Alchemist</hi>, IV., 2.</note>
But we must not forget that Massinger was the bosom
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
friend of Fletcher, in whose plays sailors occur again and
again.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Champernal in <hi rend='italic'>The Little French Lawyer</hi>, and Alberto
in <hi rend='italic'>The Fair Maid of the Inn</hi>. Notice too the zest with which
Valerio (<hi rend='italic'>A Wife for a Month</hi>, V., 3) describes the sea-action
with the Turks.</note>
</p>

<p>
The fact that Massinger was a Cavalier <q>Radical,</q> a
free lance and grumbler of the Opposition, may in part
explain his struggles and his poverty. His natural
patrons may have looked askance at his independent attitude,
so alien to the passive obedience preached by
Fletcher. But, whatever were his politics, it is clear that
he was no Puritan. Brought up in close contact with a
noble house, educated at Oxford, and well versed in the
classics,<note place='foot'>The question whether Massinger knew Greek is discussed
in <ref target='Appendix_II'>Appendix II</ref>. To take one play only, <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of
Honour</hi>, we find classical allusions in I., 1, 240; I., 2, 36, 107-128;
II., 1, 48; II., 2, 23; II., 3, 26; II., 4, 17; II., 5, 13,
28; III., I, 29; III., I, 194; IV., 4, 13; IV., 4, 97, 108, 109;
IV., 4, 140-145.</note> as many allusions in his works testify, he shows
alike in his merits and his faults the Cavalier mind. To
this extent he may be judged <q><hi rend='italic'>felix opportunitate mortis</hi>,</q>
for of all sections of the nation those whose hearts were
with the King, and their reason with the Opposition, had
the hardest part to play after 1640.
</p>

<p>
In the department of literature the talent of the
country had concentrated itself more and more on play-writing.
Among Massinger's contemporaries we note
Jonson, Chapman, Fletcher, Beaumont, Webster, Middleton,
Dekker, Heywood, Rowley, Tourneur, Shirley&mdash;all
keen and able dramatists. Massinger, in his grasp of stagecraft,
his flexible metre, his desire in the sphere of ethics
to exploit both vice and virtue, is typical of an age which
had much culture, but which, without being exactly
corrupt, lacked moral fibre.
</p>

<p>
His plays may be divided into three classes: first, those
which have come down to us under his name; secondly,
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
those which he wrote with Fletcher or other authors;
and, thirdly, those which have disappeared. It is not
easy to draw the border-line between the first and second
classes. In the last forty years the students of English
literature have devoted much attention to verse and other
tests, and there are those who profess themselves competent
to decide which parts of a composite play were
written by the various collaborators. It is clear that the
use of these tests requires caution. An author may
sometimes experiment in the style of somebody else; it
has been held that Shakspere wrote <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> in the
manner of Fletcher, his younger rival; and Delius was of
opinion that <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi> is due to two
imitators, one of Shakspere and one of Fletcher. Boyle
speaks confidently as follows:<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, xxvi., p. 581.</note> <q>Mr. Fleay used almost
exclusively versification to distinguish author from author.
Nor is this by any means so bold an undertaking as it
seems. I have used other tests apart from the versification,
and have almost uniformly found the impressions
derived from the latter correct.</q> Our confidence in
Boyle is shaken when he attributes<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Englische Studien</hi>, V., 93.</note> the first two acts of
<hi rend='italic'>A New Way to pay Old Debts</hi> to Fletcher on the evidence
of the double endings. He points out that the allusion to
the taking of Breda on July 1st, 1625,<note place='foot'>I., 2, 27.</note> is just possible,
as Fletcher was buried on August 29th, 1625. This is
clearly a case where we must take other than metrical
considerations into account. Has the comedy the sparkle,
the bustle, and the improbability of Fletcher?
</p>

<p>
Again, it is not too much to say that it is a waste of
time to apply verse tests to Tourneur; a great part of the
<hi rend='italic'>Atheist's Tragedy</hi> is not poetry at all, but prose measured
off in lengths.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi> states on its title-page that Dekker
was part author. Similarly, <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi> was partly
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
due to Field. Part of <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi><note place='foot'>Also called <hi rend='italic'>The Prince of Tarent</hi>. It would have been
easier for Fletcher to imitate Massinger than for Massinger to
imitate Fletcher. The pathos and comedy of the latter were
alike out of our author's range.</note> is held by many
critics to be written by Fletcher; certainly the style of
the play is in places more tender and more racy than
we should expect from Massinger. <hi rend='italic'>The Old Law</hi> is said
to have been written by Massinger, Middleton, and
Rowley. It was a popular play, and often revived; its
first appearance was in 1599,<note place='foot'>III., 1, 39.</note> when our poet was but
fifteen years old. His share in it must therefore consist
of additions or modifications at a later date. Certainly
there is little in the play which reminds one of him;
original as is its plot, and tender its pathos, both its
tragedy and comedy are in a simpler manner than his.<note place='foot'>See discussion on p. <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, Boyle arrives at some startling
results when he investigates the works of Fletcher.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <ref target='Appendix_III'>Appendix III</ref>.</note>
He attributes to Massinger parts of <hi rend='italic'>Thierry and
Theodoret</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Queen of Corinth</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Knight of Malta</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Custom of the Country</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Little French Lawyer</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The
Fair Maid of the Inn</hi>, and of several other plays.<note place='foot'>The question suggests itself at once: Did Massinger ever
collaborate with Beaumont? Mr. Macaulay does not face
this problem in his interesting monograph on Beaumont;
indeed, he ignores Massinger's undoubted claims to have
collaborated with Fletcher, though he makes full amends for
this omission in his article in the <hi rend='italic'>Cambridge History of English
Literature</hi>. Boyle at one time thought that Massinger worked
with Beaumont and Fletcher in <hi rend='italic'>The Honest Man's Fortune</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>The Knight of Malta</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, pp. 589-590).</note>
</p>

<p>
It may appear strange that in order to estimate Massinger
we should have to read Fletcher as well; but to
this the scientific study of English brings us.<note place='foot'>From the nature of the case the idea is not new; thus
Weber, in the Preface to the 1812 Edinburgh edition of
Beaumont and Fletcher, attributes the completion of <hi rend='italic'>The
Lover's Progress</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Love's Pilgrimage</hi>, and the character of
Septimius in <hi rend='italic'>The False One</hi> to Massinger. Fleay (<hi rend='italic'>Shakespeare
Manual</hi>, p. 152) makes out a list of ten of Fletcher's plays in
which he traces Massinger's hand. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <ref target='Appendix_III'>Appendix III</ref>.</note> Boyle
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
declares that <q>we ought in future to have no more
editions of Beaumont and Fletcher, but the plays of
Beaumont, Fletcher, and Massinger arranged in nine
groups.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Eng. St.</hi>, VII., 75.</note> The verdict of experts cannot be disregarded
in this matter; there is a real danger that Massinger's
merits will be underrated if we do not attempt to estimate
the share which he took in writing the plays attributed
to Fletcher. His friend Sir Aston Cokaine might have
done us a great service here, but, unfortunately, he missed
his opportunity. In a poem<note place='foot'>Reprinted 1877. Congleton. A copy of the original book
is to be seen at Shakspere's birthhouse, Stratford-on-Avon.</note> relating to Shirley's
edition of Beaumont and Fletcher's works published in
1647,<note place='foot'>An inauspicious date for such a publication!</note> he points out that the title is inaccurate for two
reasons: first, because many of the plays were written
after Beaumont's death; secondly, because Massinger
wrote parts of some of them; it is a great pity that he
did not tell us which these plays were.
</p>

<p>
But worse still remains behind; if we are to believe
Boyle, it is practically certain that Massinger and
Fletcher wrote <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi><note place='foot'><p>There are many touches in <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> which remind
one of Massinger; and not a few passages in Massinger remind
one of <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>. Take as an example <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, III.,
2, 111.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Luke.</hi>                        O my lord!<lb/>
This heap of wealth, which you possess me of,<lb/>
Which to a worldly man had been a blessing,<lb/>
And to the messenger might with justice challenge<lb/>
A kind of adoration, is to me<lb/>
A curse I cannot thank you for; and, much less<lb/>
Rejoice in that tranquillity of mind<lb/>
My brother's vows must purchase. I have made<lb/>
A dear exchange with him: he now enjoys<lb/>
My peace and poverty, the trouble of<lb/>
His wealth conferr'd on me; and that a burthen<lb/>
Too heavy for my weak shoulders.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lord Lacy.</hi>               Honest Soul,<lb/>
With what feeling he receives it!
</p>
<p>
Or this from <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, IV., 2, 87.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Alonso.</hi>                    She cause, alas!<lb/>
Her innocence knew no guilt, but too much favour.<lb/>
To me unworthy of it; 'twas my baseness,<lb/>
My foul ingratitude&mdash;what shall I say more?<lb/>
The good Octavio no sooner fell<lb/>
In the displeasure of his prince, his state<lb/>
Confiscated, and he forced to leave the Court,<lb/>
And she exposed to want; but all my oaths<lb/>
And protestation of service to her,<lb/>
Like seeming flames, raised by enchantment, vanish'd;<lb/>
This, this sits heavy here.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, I., 2,126-134. I feel inclined to say that
Massinger knew <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> by heart. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. infra</hi>, pp. 84, 85.</p></note> and <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
Kinsmen</hi>.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi> is a remarkable play, full of fine
poetry and lofty thought. On the other hand, its technique
is very immature. The Gaoler's daughter's soliloquies are
inartistic, and at times ludicrous. The play has at once the
dignity of an early period and the complexity of style with
which we are familiar in Shakspere's later manner. One
thing is clear: Act I. is by a different hand from the rest.
Perhaps Shakspere and Fletcher touched up an old anonymous
play.
</p>
<p>
See, however, discussion <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, pp. <ref target='Pg084'>84-104</ref>.</p></note> It must be pointed out that there are still good
critics who attribute a large part of <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> to
Shakspere, and a small part of <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>.
It would take us too far from our subject to enter in
detail on these two difficult problems.
</p>

<p>
Then, in the third place, there are the plays that are
lost. In the eighteenth century there was a certain John
Warburton, F.R.S. and F.S.A., Somerset herald, who
collected no fewer than fifty-five genuine unpublished
dramas of the golden period, which he handed over to the
care of his cook until he could find someone to publish
them. The cook appropriated these plays leaf by leaf
for coverings for her pastry, and a certain number of
Massinger's&mdash;possibly as many as ten&mdash;perished among
them. Here are the names of some of them: <hi rend='italic'>The Forced
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
Lady</hi>, a tragedy; <hi rend='italic'>The Noble Choice</hi>, a comedy; <hi rend='italic'>The
Wandering Lovers</hi>, a comedy; <hi rend='italic'>Philenzo and Hippolita</hi>, a
tragi-comedy.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <ref target='Appendix_V'>Appendix V</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
It may be a consolation when we grieve over this disaster<note place='foot'>Mr. Halliwell Philipps, in his MS. note to <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You
List</hi>, now in the British Museum, expresses himself as sceptical
of the Warburton legend. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Greg's <hi rend='italic'>Bakings of Betsy</hi>
(<hi rend='italic'>Library</hi>, July, 1911).</note>
to reflect that many of the fifty-five plays may
not have been worth reading; eight of them were early
works of Massinger's, and may have been immature or
even unsuccessful. There is a presumption in favour of
this supposition, for his more famous plays appeared
separately in quarto, and most of them can still be procured
from dealers in that form; we must suppose that
Mr. Warburton had only what are called actors'&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
manuscript&mdash;copies. If a play never attained the distinction
of being printed there may have been some
defect which militated against its success.
</p>

<p>
Colonel Cunningham in his edition gives us the names
of thirty-seven plays in all from Massinger's pen; if the
many be added to this total in which he joined with other
writers, we have a considerable literary output for a life
of fifty-five years.
</p>

<p>
Massinger, like Shakspere, fell into disfavour after
the Restoration, when Beaumont and Fletcher carried
everything before them. We learn from Malone's
Preface<note place='foot'>Shakspere, III., p. 275. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Downes' <hi rend='italic'>Roscius Anglicanus</hi>,
pp. 18, 52.</note> that <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi> was acted in 1661 and
<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi> on January 10th, 1662; <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>
on June 6th in the same year. Pepys saw <hi rend='italic'>The
Virgin Martyr</hi>, and liked it,<note place='foot'>Diary, 1848 edition, I., p. 192; IV., p. 373.</note> more, however, for the music
than the words. Dryden and Jeremy Collier never mention
Massinger. Selections from <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi> appeared
in prose form, with insertions from <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, in
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
1680, under the title <hi rend='italic'>Love Lost in the Dark, or the
Drunken Couple</hi>. Adorio and the other names are the
same, but the Guardian's part disappears, and his remarks
are put in Adorio's mouth. A servant, Calandrino, is
brought in, whose name is borrowed from <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke
of Florence</hi>, and Muggulla, a nurse, is added to be Calandrino's
bride. The contents are worthy of the title.
Monck Mason deplores the fact that Johnson's dictionary
does not once quote Massinger or Beaumont and
Fletcher. <q>They are more correct,</q> he says, <q>and
grammatical than Shakspere, and appear to have had a
more competent knowledge of other languages, which
gave them a more accurate idea of their own.</q> There
was a great reaction in the eighteenth century in favour
of Massinger. Brander Matthews points out that <hi rend='italic'>The New
Way</hi> is the only Elizabethan or Jacobean play, except
Shakspere's, which held the stage until the first quarter
of the nineteenth century,<note place='foot'>Gayley's <hi rend='italic'>Representative English Comedies</hi>, p. 319.</note> and gives a good history of
its illustrious career on the English and American stages.
</p>

<p>
The critics have differed much about Massinger.
Gifford<note place='foot'>Gifford's edition of Massinger, in four volumes, is one of
the classics of our literature, though careless in details.</note> and Hallam were enthusiastic in their support;
Charles Lamb and Hazlitt<note place='foot'>To Hazlitt, however, we owe, in his estimate of Sir Giles
Overreach, one of the most brilliant pieces of English prose
that we possess.</note> were against him, perhaps
because they disliked his able Tory editor. The
eighteenth-century writers regarded him as the champion
of female virtue; and in our own time Sir A. Ward has
defended his manly and sane morality in unhesitating
language.<note place='foot'>(<hi rend='italic'>E. D. L.</hi>, iii., p. 42) <q>In Massinger we seem to recognize
a man who firmly believes in the eternal difference between
right and wrong, and never consciously swerves aside from
the canon he acknowledges.</q></note> On the other hand, Boyle deems his heroines
to be corrupt and his heroes <q>the victims of one devouring
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
passion, often in a state of incipient madness, alternately
raging and melancholy.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, xxvi., p. 586.</note>
</p>

<p>
Like Euripides, Ovid, and Juvenal, Massinger is a
writer whose faults are patent; all the more important,
therefore, is it to make his merits quite clear. We cannot
convince the world if we adopt the famous line of Goethe's
heroine:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I cannot reason, I can only feel.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iphigenia auf Tauris</hi>, IV., 4: <q>Ich untersuche nicht, ich
fühle nur.</q></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I do not indeed claim to discover much that is new
about Massinger, nor to reverse the judgment of time.
He is, and he remains, in the second rank of English
writers. But it would be a misfortune if undue obscurity
were to befall an author who was at once so manly and
so skilful. I take up the cudgels for him, partly because
the balance of critical judgment has of late gone too far
against him; and yet in a sense he has only come into his
own in the last thirty years, by reason of the unanimity
with which so much good strong work in Fletcher's plays
is now deemed to be due to him. He has received much
praise and much blame; I should like by careful analysis
of the problem to arrive at a juster judgment. But
in the main, I must confess, I plead for Massinger because
I love him.
</p>

<p>
What, then, are the chief merits of our author? They
are three: his stagecraft, his style, and his metre. And,
first, his command of stagecraft has been universally
conceded.<note place='foot'>Dr. Bradley (<hi rend='italic'>Oxford Lectures</hi>, p. 383) points out that
<q>the average play of Shakspere's day has great merits of a
strictly dramatic kind, but it is not <q>well-built,</q> it is not
what we mean by <q>a good play.</q></q> He traces this fault to
the multiplication of scenes, which the absence of scenery in
those days made easy.</note> This is an important point; it is as much as
to say that the plays are readable and would act well;<note place='foot'>Gayley points out (<hi rend='italic'>R. E. C.</hi>, p. xci.) that, <q>Shakspere and
Fletcher excepted, Massinger has been adjudged by posterity
the most successful of the practical dramatists of the early
seventeenth century.</q> He suggests (<hi rend='italic'>R. E. C.</hi>, p. xcv.) that
with slight and judicious modification an enterprising actor-manager
might successfully produce <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Maid
of Honour</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>, and perhaps <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>.</note>
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
when you begin one of them you wish to know what is
going to happen. The first act has usually a great breadth
and swing; it is admirably proportioned and dignified.
The chief characters are introduced, and the train is well
laid, without stiffness or delay. Good examples of this
fact are to be found in <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor
of the East</hi>. In <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi> the first scene at once
reveals the object of the plot, the rescue of Paulina. In
<hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi> Marullo enters at line 38, and our attention
is called to him by Leosthenes. As the play progresses
you feel that it is what the French call <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>bien charpenté</foreign>&mdash;well
constructed. If, as is often the case, there is a
mystery or a secret, it is sufficiently well kept to excite
the curiosity. The author does not depend very much
on soliloquies or disguises; he does not, as a rule, complicate
matters by underplots and cross-interests. The
stage is not overcrowded; you do not feel the need of
constantly referring to the list of <hi rend='italic'>dramatis personae</hi>. A
curious instance of this economy is <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi>,
where there is no Queen of Sicily. Minor characters when
they reappear are recognized and provided for, as, for
example, Calypso in <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi> (IV., 3). The conscientious
author forgets no detail in order to round off
his plot; thus in the same play the blow struck at the
beginning is apologized for in V., 3, 250. Nor is there a
reckless change of scene. Moreover, a lifelike effect is
given by the fact that speeches generally end in the middle
of a line. As so often in Euripides, the people say the
sort of things that under the circumstances you would
expect them to say in real life.<note place='foot'>Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Rhetoric</hi>, III., p. 1404<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>.</note> A comparison of Massinger
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
with Ben Jonson will make this ease of construction
clear at once. Köppel has noted the skill with which
the narratives of Suetonius and Dion Cassius are combined
in <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>. It may sound obvious to add
that the titles of the plays correspond to the chief subject-matter,
were it not that in so many of the Elizabethan
plays this is not the case. Take as examples Middleton's
<hi rend='italic'>Changeling</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Mayor of Queenborough</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Yet it would be too much to say that all Massinger's
plays are equally successful in this respect. The plot of
<hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>, for example, is unusually intricate. Like
Shakspere, he occasionally crowds too much into the
fifth act&mdash;for instance, in <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi>. The
device of the apple which produces so much jealousy and
trouble in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi> is rather trivial for a
tragi-comedy.<note place='foot'>IV., 2. On the other hand, we should remember that
our author did not invent this incident, but took it from
Byzantine history. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Gibbon's <hi rend='italic'>Decline and Fall</hi>, chapter
xxxii.</note> The promise of Cleora to wear a scarf
over her eyes until her jealous lover returns from the
war is exasperating.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, II., 1, 187. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> ὁ ἄφωνος in Ar. <hi rend='italic'>Poetics</hi>,
1460 a. 32.</note> Again, Camiola in <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of
Honour</hi> (III., 3, 200) forgets that Bertoldo is <q>bound to
a single life,</q> as she had herself pointed out to him
(I., 2, 148). Nor does Bertoldo (IV., 3, 100) in his
acceptance of her offer say anything about the necessary
dispensation. On the other hand, Massinger avoids
those scenes on board ship of which Fletcher is so fond,
and which on the Jacobean stage must have been ineffective
to the spectators, and indeed, are so on any stage.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Sea Voyage</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Double Marriage</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Similarly, it is clear that torture on the stage can
hardly be made effective.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, III., 2, 71; <hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, V., 2, 206.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Dr. Bradley's remarks (<hi rend='italic'>Oxford Lectures</hi>, p. 366, note) on
the blinding of Gloucester in <hi rend='italic'>King Lear</hi>. When the Duke
in Ford's <hi rend='italic'>Love's Sacrifice</hi> (V., 3) stabs himself and cries aloud:
</p>
<p>
Sprightful flood,<lb/>
Run out in rivers! O, that these thick streams<lb/>
Could gather head, and make a standing pool,<lb/>
That jealous husbands here might bathe in blood;
</p>
<p>
the words can only produce an anticlimax in the spectator's
mind, however effective they may be to the reader. Massinger
is more dexterous in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>, IV., 4, 154: <q>Yes, sir;
this is her heart's blood, is it not? I think it be.</q> There is a
similar difficulty about D'Amville in <hi rend='italic'>The Atheist's Tragedy</hi>
(V., 2) knocking out his brains with the executioner's axe; and
about Scaevola in <hi rend='italic'>The Rape of Lucrece</hi> (V. 4) burning off his
hand. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Bajazet and Zabina in <hi rend='italic'>Tamburlaine</hi>, Pt. I.,
V., 1, and Tamburlaine himself in Pt. II., III., 2.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>

<p>
One of Massinger's favourite devices is to combine
subordinates. He has learnt from <hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi> the lesson of
Rosencrantz and Guildenstern. He has studied the
method of such scenes as <hi rend='italic'>Henry V.</hi>, I., 2, 97-135; II., 2;
III., 5; III., 7. If something has to be done, two or
three people express their eagerness to do it. If someone
has to be persuaded, two or three of the characters press
home the various arguments. This all works for lucidity
and ease, and presents a lifelike combination on the stage.<note place='foot'>Needless to say, the idea is not original; it is already a
marked feature of Marlowe's <hi rend='italic'>Tamburlaine</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Faustus</hi>; but
the device does not often work so smoothly as in Massinger.</note>
Instances of the device abound; let us take one from <hi rend='italic'>The
Picture</hi>.<note place='foot'>II., 2, 59-77. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, I., 1 (the three
kings); <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, II., 1 (Theodosius and his courtiers);
<hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, I., 3, 43 (the servants); <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>,
IV., 1 (Luke and the three creditors); IV., 2 (Luke and the two
apprentices); <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, I., 1 (Matilda and the waiting-women);
V., 1 (Octavio and three friends); <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I.,
3 (Timoleon and four senators); <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, II., 2
(Theocrine and three attendants); <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, I., 2
(three councillors); II., 2; V., 2 and 3 (Cozimo and courtiers);
<hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, IV., 4 (Severino and four banditti); <hi rend='italic'>Maid of
Honour</hi>, I., 1 (Bertoldo and the two heirs <q>city bred</q>);
<hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, IV., 1, 98; V., 1, 213 (the three tribunes); V. 2,
1-19 (the conspirators); <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi> I., 3, <hi rend='italic'>ad init.</hi>
(three gentlemen). We find this method again and again in
Webster; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Duchess of Malfi</hi>, p. 63<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>; p. 78<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>; p. 80<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>The White Devil</hi>, p. 56; p. 42<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>The Devil's Law-case</hi>, p. 111<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>;
p. 116<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Cymbal and Fitton in <hi rend='italic'>The Staple of News</hi>,
I., 2; and the three courtiers in <hi rend='italic'>Cupid's Revenge</hi>.</note> The great soldier Ferdinand, on his return from
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
the wars, is received courteously by the old Counsellor
Eubulus, but the fashionable young men, Ubaldo and
Ricardo, think they can do the thing better; the passage
runs thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ricardo.</hi>                   This was pretty;</l>
<l>But second me now; I cannot stoop too low</l>
<l>To do your excellence that due observance</l>
<l>Your fortune claims.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Eubulus.</hi>       He ne'er thinks on his virtues!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ricardo.</hi> For, being as you are, the soul of soldiers,</l>
<l>And bulwark of Bellona&mdash;&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ubaldo.</hi>                    The protection</l>
<l>Both of the court and king&mdash;&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ricardo.</hi>                       And the sole minion</l>
<l>Of mighty Mars&mdash;&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ubaldo.</hi>      One that with justice may</l>
<l>Increase the number of the worthies&mdash;&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Eubulus.</hi>                           Heyday!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ricardo.</hi> It being impossible in my arms to circle</l>
<l>Such giant worth&mdash;&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ubaldo.</hi>        At distance we presume</l>
<l>To kiss your honour'd gauntlet.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Eubulus.</hi>                   What reply now</l>
<l>Can he make to this foppery?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ferdinand.</hi>             You have said,</l>
<l>Gallants, so much and hitherto done so little,</l>
<l>That till I learn to speak and you to do,</l>
<l>I must take time to thank you.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Eubulus.</hi>                 As I live,</l>
<l>Answer'd as I could wish, how the fops gape now!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ricardo.</hi> This was harsh and scurvy.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ubaldo.</hi>        We will be revenged,</l>
<l>When he comes to court the ladies, and laugh at him.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Another of Massinger's effective devices is to sustain
the interest of the spectators by concealing characters
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
and facts; thus, in <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi> we do not fathom
for some time the villainy of Francisco; in <hi rend='italic'>The City
Madam</hi> we ponder from the beginning over the obscure
character of Luke. The best instances of this expedient
are to be found in <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>.
The air of gloom which overhangs the former
tragedy is as great in its way as anything which our
author has attained; and though the play is what we may
call Elizabethan rather than for all time, yet it is in some
sense the best specimen of his serious work. The desire of
Malefort is that of the father in Shelley's <hi rend='italic'>Cenci</hi>; and
perhaps the only way to prevent the theme from being
intolerable was to veil it as long as possible, and to raise
the spectators' sympathy at first for a man who had
fought well for the State, and who to all appearance was
badly treated by his pirate son.<note place='foot'>The exact cause of the son's anger is the murder of his
mother by his father. The secret is not revealed until
Act V., 2, 122, though it is hinted at in II., 1, 118-120. The
son knows nothing of the other terrible charge.</note> In <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>,
Marullo and Timandra, the brother and sister, are concealed
till the very end, when they reveal themselves
to be Pisander and Statilia&mdash;thereby bringing to an
unexpected conclusion a plot which seemed to offer no
solution.<note place='foot'>In <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi> the brother and sister are not revealed
until V., 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi> the method is varied a little: here
we have one of Massinger's greatest creations, the fawning
hypocrite, Luke. Indications of his future development
are skilfully given from time to time, so that when this
alarming person at length shows himself in his true colours
we shiver without being surprised. The same idea shows
itself in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>,<note place='foot'>IV., 3.</note> in the skill with which Donusa
leads up to her proposal that Vitelli should turn Mahometan;
and in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>,<note place='foot'>I., 1.</note> where Artemia prepares
the way for the offer of her hand to Antoninus.
</p>

<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>

<p>
Massinger is never so happy as when he has an opportunity
in his well-proportioned scenes for displays of
rhetoric, such as we find in Euripides, where character
argues against character.<note place='foot'>The best instance of Euripidean art is the scene in <hi rend='italic'>The
Emperor of the East</hi> (II., 1), where all the arguments for the
Emperor's speedy marriage are cleverly amassed. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also
Luke's appeal for mercy to the creditors in <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>,
I., 3; the long preparation which Sforza makes in <hi rend='italic'>The Duke
of Milan</hi>, I., 3, 268; the skill which leads up to the disclosure
of Marullo's name in <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi> (IV., 3, 124), and the way
in which he persuades the slaves to revolt (II., 3). For other
instances of what we may call the gradual method, compare
<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, I., 1, 294, and <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, V., 4, 91.</note> These scenes are often thrown
into the form of a trial at law or a debate in the Senate.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry</hi>, I., 2; IV., 4; V., 2; <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, I., 3;
<hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I., 3; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1; <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of
Florence</hi>, V., 3.</note>
</p>

<p>
The plays end well and effectively; our author excels
in the tragi-comedy, a type much affected by Fletcher.
Like all his contemporaries, he felt that the intermixture
of a lighter element in a play which ended happily was
justifiable.<note place='foot'>Here he incurs the censure of Milton on such plays
(Preface to <hi rend='italic'>Samson Agonistes</hi>): <q>This is mentioned to vindicate
tragedy from the small esteem, or rather infamy, which
in the account of many it undergoes at this day with other
common interludes; happening through the poet's error of
intertwining comic stuff with tragic sadness and gravity; or
introducing trivial and vulgar persons, which by all judicious
hath been counted absurd, and brought in without discretion,
corruptly to gratify the people!</q></note> The haste which Shakspere sometimes shows
in his fifth act is, as a rule, not apparent in Massinger.
For example, in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, the death of the
heroine occurs at the end of the fourth act. To all
appearance there is bound to be an anticlimax in the
fifth act. But there is not; on the contrary, the appearance
of the heavenly messenger, bearing the fruits of
Paradise to the cruel persecutor Theophilus, elevates the
mind into a state of surprise and admiration. It has
often been pointed out that the appearance of a deity to
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
cut the knot at the end of a play of Euripides, which
sometimes irritates the thinker in his study, and provokes
him to write essays on the bad art and theology of the
poet, is dazzlingly beautiful on the stage, and raises
associations of sublimity and awe; it may in the same
way be imagined how effective must have been the procession
at the end of <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>. The stage
directions run as follows: <q>Enter Dorothea in a white
robe, crownes upon her head, led in by Angels, Antoninus,
Caliste, and Christeta following, all in white, but lesse
glorious, the Angell with a Crowne for him</q> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Theophilus).
At the sight of the glorious vision the persecutor
dies, converted to the Christian faith, and the evil spirit,
which has prompted his cruel acts, sinks to his own place
with thunder and lightning, while Diocletian and his court
look on in amazement. Similarly, in <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>
there is no anticlimax; though Paris dies in the fourth
act,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Shakspere's <hi rend='italic'>Julius Caesar</hi>, where the hero dies in the
third act; but the plot is not felt to have exhausted itself
until Brutus and Cassius are disposed of.</note> we feel that the tragedy is incomplete until it is
rounded off by the punishment of the Emperor Domitian,
which we breathlessly await.
</p>

<p>
Secondly, Massinger has a beautiful style. This point
again is conceded by all the critics. The elegance of his
dedications shows that had he wished he could have
written excellent prose.<note place='foot'>Massinger is very sparing in his use of prose in his plays,
though Fleay goes too far when he says: <q>Neither Fletcher
nor Massinger admits prose</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Shakespeare Manual</hi>, p. 71).
The grace of Massinger's dedications is very marked when
compared with the stilted and obscure style of Ford's.</note> One who depreciates him
allows that his style is <q>pure and free from violent metaphors
and harsh constructions.</q><note place='foot'>C. Lamb.</note> It has the grace and
balance which one would expect from a well-bred and
educated man, owing little to ornament or epithets or
images. It serves its purpose, which is to tell a story
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
rapidly, and to unfold character rather than to display
the author's command of language or subtlety of thought
and expression. Seldom trivial, it is never prosaic, and
yet it is constantly on the border-line of prose. Massinger
thought in blank verse because he was a dramatist
rather than because he was a poet. Hence his enemies
might say that his lines are prose in lengths; yet that
would be an unjust accusation. The poetical <q>colour</q>
is here, the ideal dignity, the atmosphere, although they
obtrude themselves less on the reader than in most poets.
Like Ovid, Massinger is one whose amazing facility carries
us along like a flood&mdash;a writer who should be read in
large quantities at a time,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Whose easy Pegasus will amble o'er</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Some three-score miles of fancy in an hour.</q><note place='foot'>Lines referring to Massinger quoted by Langbaine.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It needs little argument to show that a poet of this
order can easily secure the effect of verisimilitude to life,
and will owe much of his success to that fact. Style
naturally appeals differently to different people; there
are those who are captivated by the glamour of Shelley
and Swinburne, or the pomp of Jeremy Taylor; there are
also those who enjoy the severity of <hi rend='italic'>Paradise Regained</hi>,
and the simplicity of Newman's <hi rend='italic'>Sermons</hi>. In an age
like the present, when many of our poets, like our musicians,
whatever else they are, either will not or cannot be
simple, it is refreshing to turn to an author who is always
lucid, and who is content to tell a story to the best of his
ability.
</p>

<p>
There are times when the style of Massinger rises into
solemn eloquence, especially when he indulges in the
moralizing vein. Unlike some of his literary contemporaries,
Massinger wishes to show Virtue triumphant
and Vice beaten. Vice is never glorified in his pages, or
condoned. Honest indignation is perhaps the emotion
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
which he handles best. The uncontrollable anger which
meanness and unworthiness provoke expresses itself in
lofty language. Forcible and plain-spoken rebukes are
found, which show that Massinger could be curt when he
pleased. The plays are full of high-spirited passages,
affording admirable opportunities for a master of elocution.
</p>

<p>
Let me give a specimen of just anger in the speech of
Marullo. Marullo is the leader of the revolt of the
slaves at Syracuse, and he is addressing their former lords
and masters:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 34'>Briefly thus then,</l>
<l>Since I must speak for all,&mdash;your tyranny</l>
<l>Drew us from our obedience. Happy those times</l>
<l>When lords were styled fathers of families,</l>
<l>And not imperious masters! when they number'd</l>
<l>Their servants almost equal with their sons,</l>
<l>Or one degree beneath them! when their labours</l>
<l>Were cherish'd and rewarded, and a period</l>
<l>Set to their sufferings; when they did not press</l>
<l>Their duties or their wills, beyond the power</l>
<l>And strength of their performance! all things order'd</l>
<l>With such decorum, as wise lawmakers</l>
<l>From each well-govern'd private house deriv'd</l>
<l>The perfect model of a Commonwealth.</l>
<l>Humanity then lodged in the hearts of men,</l>
<l>And thankful masters carefully provided</l>
<l>For creatures wanting reason. The noble horse</l>
<l>That, in his fiery youth, from his wide nostrils</l>
<l>Neigh'd courage to his rider, and brake through</l>
<l>Groves of opposed pikes, bearing his lord</l>
<l>Safe to triumphant victory, old or wounded,</l>
<l>Was set at liberty and freed from service.</l>
<l>The Athenian mules that from the quarry drew</l>
<l>Marble, hew'd for the temples of the gods,</l>
<l>The great work ended, were dismiss'd and fed</l>
<l>At the public cost; nay, faithful dogs have found</l>
<l>Their sepulchres; but man to man more cruel,</l>
<l>Appoints no end to the sufferings of his slave;</l>
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
<l>Since pride stepp'd in and riot, and o'erturned</l>
<l>This goodly frame of concord, teaching masters</l>
<l>To glory in the abuse of such as are</l>
<l>Brought under their command; who grown unuseful,</l>
<l>Are less esteem'd than beasts. This you have practis'd,</l>
<l>Practis'd on us with rigour; this hath forced us</l>
<l>To shake our heavy yokes off; and, if redress</l>
<l>Of these just grievances be not granted us,</l>
<l>We'll right ourselves, and by strong hand defend</l>
<l>What we are now possess'd of.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, IV., 2, 51-88.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In a lower key of manly dignity is the speech of Charalois
before the Judges in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>. It begins
thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'>Thus low my duty</l>
<l>Answers your lordships' counsel. I will use,</l>
<l>In the few words with which I am to trouble</l>
<l>Your lordships' ears the temper that you wish me;</l>
<l>Not that I fear to speak my thoughts as loud,</l>
<l>And with a liberty beyond Romont;</l>
<l>But that I know, for me that am made up</l>
<l>Of all that's wretched, so to haste my end,</l>
<l>Would seem to most rather a willingness</l>
<l>To quit the burden of a hopeless life</l>
<l>Than scorn of death or duty to the dead.<note place='foot'>I., 2, 147.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
As an example of a high-spirited passage, a speech may
be given from <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>. Cleora, the heroine, comes
forward in a meeting of the Senate to urge patriotic effort
on her fellow-countrymen. Timoleon, the general, is in
the chair, and she addresses him first:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cleora.</hi>                  If a virgin,</l>
<l>Whose speech was ever yet ushered with fear;</l>
<l>One knowing modesty and humble silence</l>
<l>To be the choicest ornaments of our sex</l>
<l>In the presence of so many reverend men,</l>
<l>Struck dumb with terror and astonishment,</l>
<l>Presume to clothe her thought in vocal sounds,</l>
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
<l>Let her find pardon. First to you, great sir,</l>
<l>A bashful maid's thanks, and her zealous prayers,</l>
<l>Wing'd with pure innocence, bearing them to heaven,</l>
<l>For all prosperity that the gods can give</l>
<l>To one whose piety must exact their care,</l>
<l>Thus low I offer.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Timoleon.</hi>    'Tis a happy omen.</l>
<l>Rise, blest one, and speak boldly. On my virtue</l>
<l>I am thy warrant, from so clear a spring</l>
<l>Sweet rivers ever flow.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cleora.</hi>          Then thus to you,</l>
<l>My noble father, and these lords, to whom</l>
<l>I next owe duty; no respect forgotten</l>
<l>To you my brother, and these bold young men</l>
<l>(Such I would have them) that are, or should be,</l>
<l>The city's sword and target of defence,</l>
<l>To all of you I speak; and if a blush</l>
<l>Steal on my cheeks, it is shown to reprove</l>
<l>Your paleness, willingly I would not say,</l>
<l>Your cowardice or fear; think you all treasure</l>
<l>Hid in the bowels of the earth, or shipwreck'd</l>
<l>In Neptune's wat'ry kingdom, can hold weight,</l>
<l>When liberty and honour fill one scale,</l>
<l>Triumphant Justice sitting on the beam?</l>
<l>Or dare you but imagine that your gold is</l>
<l>Too dear a salary for such as hazard</l>
<l>Their blood and lives in your defence? For me,</l>
<l>An ignorant girl, bear witness! heaven, so far</l>
<l>I prize a soldier, that to give him pay,</l>
<l>With such devotion as our flamens offer</l>
<l>Their sacrifices at the holy altar,</l>
<l>I do lay down these jewels, will make sale</l>
<l>Of my superfluous wardrobe, to supply</l>
<l>The meanest of their wants.<note place='foot'>I., 3, 268-30 6.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This passage is printed in a broadside (headed <q>Countrymen</q>)
relating to the expected invasion of England by
Bonaparte, to be found at the British Museum. A short
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
statement of the plot of <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi> is followed by a
quotation of Act I., 3, 213-368, with one or two slight
omissions. Possibly Gifford inspired its publication.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps the most eloquent passage in Massinger is the
speech of Paris, the Roman actor, before the Senate, in
defence of his profession:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Aretinus.</hi>          Are you on the stage,</l>
<l>You talk so boldly?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Paris.</hi>         The whole world being one,</l>
<l>This place is not exempted; and I am</l>
<l>So confident in the justice of our cause,</l>
<l>That I would wish Cæsar, in whose great name</l>
<l>All kings are comprehended, sate as judge</l>
<l>To hear our plea, and then determine of us.</l>
<l>If to express a man sold to his lusts,</l>
<l>Wasting the treasure of his time and fortunes</l>
<l>In wanton dalliance, and to what sad end</l>
<l>A wretch that's so given over does arrive at;</l>
<l>Deterring careless youth by his example,</l>
<l>From such licentious courses; laying open</l>
<l>The snares of bawds, and the consuming arts</l>
<l>Of prodigal strumpets, can deserve reproof;</l>
<l>Why are not all your golden principles</l>
<l>Writ down by grave philosophers to instruct us,</l>
<l>To choose fair virtue for our guide, not pleasure,</l>
<l>Condemn'd unto the fire?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Sura.</hi>            There's spirit in this.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Paris.</hi> Or if desire of honour was the base</l>
<l>On which the building of the Roman empire</l>
<l>Was raised up to this height; if, to inflame</l>
<l>The noble youth with an ambitious heat</l>
<l>T'endure the frosts of danger, nay, of death,</l>
<l>To be thought worthy the triumphal wreath,</l>
<l>By glorious undertakings, may deserve</l>
<l>Reward, or favour from the commonwealth;</l>
<l>Actors may put in for as large a share</l>
<l>As all the sects of the philosophers;</l>
<l>They with cold precepts (perhaps seldom read)</l>
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
<l>Deliver, what an honourable thing</l>
<l>The active virtue is; but does that fire</l>
<l>The blood, or swell the veins with emulation,</l>
<l>To be both good and great, equal to that</l>
<l>Which is presented in our theatres?</l>
<l>Let a good actor, in a lofty scene,</l>
<l>Show great Alcides honour'd in the sweat</l>
<l>Of his twelve labours; or a bold Camillus</l>
<l>Forbidding Rome to be redeem'd with gold</l>
<l>From the insulting Gauls; or Scipio,</l>
<l>After his victories, imposing tribute</l>
<l>On conquer'd Carthage; if done to the life,</l>
<l>As if they saw their dangers, and their glories,</l>
<l>And did partake with them in their rewards,</l>
<l>All that have any spark of Roman in them,</l>
<l>The slothful arts laid by, contend to be</l>
<l>Like those they see presented.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Rusticus.</hi>                     He has put</l>
<l>The consuls to their whisper.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Paris.</hi>                        But, 'tis urged</l>
<l>That we corrupt youth and traduce superiors.</l>
<l>When do we bring a vice upon the stage,</l>
<l>That does go off unpunish'd? Do we teach,</l>
<l>By the success of wicked undertakings,</l>
<l>Others to tread in their forbidden steps?</l>
<l>We shew no arts of Lydian panderism,</l>
<l>Corinthian poisons, Persian flatteries,</l>
<l>But mulcted so in the conclusion, that</l>
<l>Even those spectators that were so inclined,</l>
<l>Go home changed men. And for traducing such</l>
<l>That are above us, publishing to the world</l>
<l>Their secret crimes, we are as innocent</l>
<l>As such as are born dumb. When we present</l>
<l>An heir, that does conspire against the life</l>
<l>Of his dear parent, numbering every hour</l>
<l>He lives, as tedious to him; if there be,</l>
<l>Among the auditors, one whose conscience tells him</l>
<l>He is of the same mould, we cannot help it.</l>
<l>Or, bringing on the stage a loose adulteress,</l>
<l>That does maintain the riotous expense</l>
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
<l>Of him that feeds her greedy lust, yet suffers</l>
<l>The lawful pledges of a former bed</l>
<l>To starve the while for hunger; if a matron</l>
<l>However great in fortune, birth, or titles,</l>
<l>Guilty of such a foul, unnatural sin,</l>
<l>Cry out 'tis writ for me, we cannot help it.</l>
<l>Or when a covetous man's express'd, whose wealth</l>
<l>Arithmetic cannot number, and whose lordships</l>
<l>A falcon in one day cannot fly over;</l>
<l>Yet he so sordid in his mind, so griping,</l>
<l>As not to afford himself the necessaries</l>
<l>To maintain life; if a patrician</l>
<l>(Though honour'd with a consulship) find himself</l>
<l>Touch'd to the quick in this, we cannot help it.</l>
<l>Or, when we shew a judge that is corrupt,</l>
<l>And will give up his sentence, as he favours</l>
<l>The person, not the cause; saving the guilty,</l>
<l>If of his faction, and as oft condemning</l>
<l>The innocent, out of particular spleen;</l>
<l>If any in this reverend assembly,</l>
<l>Nay, even yourself, my lord, that are the image</l>
<l>Of absent Cæsar, feel something in your bosom</l>
<l>That puts you in remembrance of things past,</l>
<l>Or things intended, 'tis not in us to help it.</l>
<l>I have said, my lord; and now as you find cause,</l>
<l>Or censure us, or free us with applause.<note place='foot'>I., 3, 49-142.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I will quote three more passages: one to show how lifelike
in description Massinger can be; the second, to show
how he can ennoble the expression of love; the third, to
show how tender he is at his best.
</p>

<p>
The first is from <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi>. A soldier comes
in with news for the besieged general, who is standing on
the walls of Siena, looking for aid from his friends:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Enter</hi> a Soldier.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Ferdinand.</hi> What news with thee?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Soldier.</hi> From the turret of the fort,</l>
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
<l>By the rising clouds of dust, through which, like lightning</l>
<l>The splendour of bright arms sometimes brake through,</l>
<l>I did descry some forces making towards us;</l>
<l>And from the camp, as emulous of their glory,</l>
<l>The general, for I know him by his horse,</l>
<l>And bravely seconded, encounter'd them.</l>
<l>Their greetings were too rough for friends; their swords,</l>
<l>And not their tongues, exchanging courtesies.</l>
<l>By this the main battalias are join'd;</l>
<l>And if you please to be spectators of</l>
<l>The horrid issue, I will bring you where,</l>
<l>As in a theatre, you may see their fates</l>
<l>In purple gore presented.<note place='foot'>II., 4, 22-35.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The second is from <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>, where Marcelia
expresses her love for her lord, Sforza, the Duke of
Milan.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Marcelia.</hi>      My worthiest lord!</l>
<l>The only object I behold with pleasure,</l>
<l>My pride, my glory, in a word, my all!</l>
<l>Bear witness, heaven, that I esteem myself</l>
<l>In nothing worthy of the meanest praise</l>
<l>You can bestow, unless it be in this,</l>
<l>That in my heart, I love and honour you.</l>
<l>And, but that it would smell of arrogance</l>
<l>To speak my strong desire and zeal to serve you,</l>
<l>I then could say, these eyes yet never saw</l>
<l>The rising sun, but that my vows and prayers</l>
<l>Were sent to heaven for the prosperity</l>
<l>And safety of my lord, nor have I ever</l>
<l>Had other study, but how to appear</l>
<l>Worthy your favour; and that my embraces</l>
<l>Might yield a fruitful harvest of content</l>
<l>For all your noble travail, in the purchase</l>
<l>Of her that's still your servant; by these lips,</l>
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
<l>Which pardon me that I presume to kiss&mdash;&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Sforza.</hi> O swear, for ever swear!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Marcelia.</hi>          I ne'er will seek</l>
<l>Delight but in your pleasure; and desire,</l>
<l>When you are sated<note place='foot'>I., 3, 51-74.</note> with all earthly glories,</l>
<l>And age and honours make you fit for heaven,</l>
<l>That one grave may receive us.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The third is from <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>; the disguised
John Antonio is telling his story at Almira's request:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Not far from where my father lives, a lady,</l>
<l>A neighbour by, blest with as great a beauty</l>
<l>As nature durst bestow without undoing,</l>
<l>Dwelt, and most happily, as I thought then,</l>
<l>And bless'd the house a thousand times she dwelt in.</l>
<l>This beauty, in the blossom of my youth,</l>
<l>When my first fire felt no adulterate incense,</l>
<l>Nor I no way to flatter, but my fondness;</l>
<l>In all the bravery my friends could show me,</l>
<l>In all the faith my innocence could give me,</l>
<l>In the best language my true tongue could tell me,</l>
<l>And all the broken sighs my sick heart lend me,</l>
<l>I sued and serv'd; long did I love this lady,</l>
<l>Long was my travail, long my trade to win her;</l>
<l>With all the duty of my soul I serv'd her.<note place='foot'>IV., 3, 124-138.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
At times the poet rises to what is not far removed from
inspiration; and such lines as the following from <hi rend='italic'>The
Parliament of Love</hi> make good the claim of English to be
the imperial language of the world. King Charles seeks
to justify the honours which he, the <q>most Christian
king,</q> gives to the statue of Cupid; he then continues
thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Charles.</hi> 'Tis rather to instruct deceived mankind,</l>
<l>How much pure love that has his birth in heaven,</l>
<l>And scorns to be received a guest, but in</l>
<l>A noble heart prepared to entertain him,</l>
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
<l>Is by the gross misprision of weak men,</l>
<l>Abused and injured. That celestial fire,</l>
<l>Which hieroglyphically is described</l>
<l>In this his bow, his quiver, and his torch,</l>
<l>First warm'd their bloods, and after gave a name</l>
<l>To the old heroic spirits; such as Orpheus,</l>
<l>That drew men, differing little then from beasts,</l>
<l>To civil government; or famed Alcides</l>
<l>The tyrant-queller, that refused the plain</l>
<l>And easy path leading to vicious pleasures,</l>
<l>And ending in a precipice deep as hell,</l>
<l>To scale the rugged cliffs on whose firm top</l>
<l>Virtue and Honour, crown'd with wreaths of stars,</l>
<l>Did sit triumphant.<note place='foot'>V., 1, 42-60.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But there is another characteristic of Massinger's style
and that perhaps more obvious still; it is full of courtliness
and grace. A perusal of <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>, where the
subject is the absurdity of the ladies of the Mansion House
who ape the manners of the West End, suggests the question
whether Massinger was ever attached to the Court.
We do not know. He must, at any rate, have moved
amongst refined and educated people. Napoléon said
that Corneille's plays ought to be performed to an audience
of ambassadors and ministers of state;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Prologue to <hi rend='italic'>Henry V</hi>, line 4, a passage imitated and
expanded in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, V., 2, 98-102.</note> in the same
way, in reading Massinger, we feel that we are moving
freely in the palaces of the great. There is comparatively
little here of dialect<note place='foot'>We have a Somersetshire rustic in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the
East</hi>, IV., 2. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Schmidt's <hi rend='italic'>Shakespeare Lexicon</hi>, Appendix II.,
p. 1424. <q>In general it can be said that Shakspere abstains
from the use of provincial dialects, as characteristic of his
dramatical persons.... It is only on one occasion that he
seems to imitate the peculiar speech of a certain dialect:
<hi rend='italic'>King Lear</hi>, IV., 6, 239-251. Concerning the particular
county there referred to English scholars have been of different
opinions. Steevens pleads for Somersetshire, in the dialect of
which rustics were commonly introduced by ancient writers;
Collier inclines to decide in favour of the North.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Mr. H.
Bradley's remarks in <hi rend='italic'>Shakspere's England</hi>, II., p. 570. In
<hi rend='italic'>Bartholomew Fair</hi>, IV., 3, a contrast is drawn between the
dialect of a rustic from the West and one from the North.
Urania's dialect in <hi rend='italic'>Cupid's Revenge</hi> cannot be pronounced a
success, or Antonio's Irish in <hi rend='italic'>The Coxcomb</hi>.</note> or low life; we are at once taken up
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
into high life with all its virtues and its faults. The kings
and courtiers behave and express themselves as we should
expect them to do; the politeness and the compliments
which we hear on every side have the merit of being
entirely natural. And if there is little to remind
us of Dickens, there is still less to recall Thackeray.
There is no air of snobbishness; such is the dexterity
of our author that we do not feel like Jeames
Yellowplush, that we are awkward menials watching the
doings of the titled and the great. Not only do the
characters move with an inborn grace which is free
from self-analysis and self-contempt, but they take
the audience up into their company; and as the
gallants of that era used sometimes to sit upon the
stage, close among the actors,<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, II., 2, 128. Among the things which Anne
demands from her suitor, is:
</p>
<p>
A fresh habit,<lb/>
Of a fashion never seen before, to draw<lb/>
The gallants' eyes, that sit on the stage, upon me.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Induction to <hi rend='italic'>The Malcontent</hi>; Induction to <hi rend='italic'>The
Staple of News</hi>; Induction to <hi rend='italic'>Cynthia's Revels</hi>; Fitzdottrel
in <hi rend='italic'>The Devil is an Ass</hi>, I., 3; Induction to <hi rend='italic'>Knight of the
Burning Pestle</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Woman-Hater</hi>, I., 3; Prologue to <hi rend='italic'>All Fools</hi>;
and Dekker's <hi rend='italic'>The Guls Horne-booke</hi>, Chapter VI.</p></note> so in reading Massinger
we feel that we are unconsciously present at the scenes
he portrays.
</p>

<p>
This is as much as to say that the stage of those days
responded to a real and living need in the minds of the
audience; there was nothing exotic or artificial about it,
as there seems to have been about our plays ever since
the Puritans turned things upside down. It will be said
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
that this enchanted atmosphere belongs to all the greater
playwrights of the age alike. And this is true; it is one
of the secrets of their abiding charm. Brander Matthews,
in dealing with the unreality of Massinger's atmosphere,
says that <q>some of Shakspere's most delightful plays,
<hi rend='italic'>The Merchant of Venice</hi> for one, and <hi rend='italic'>Much Ado</hi> for
another, are charming to us now only because we are
quite willing to make believe with the poet</q> (<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>,
p. 311). And so, when Leslie Stephen asks if we are
<q>invigorated</q> by the perusal of Massinger's plays,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hours in a Library</hi>, ii., p. 171. Leslie Stephen elsewhere
(pp. 167-171) does justice to Massinger's <q>romantic tendency.</q>
<q>The chivalrous ideal of morality involves a
reverence for women which may be exaggerated or affected,
but which has at least a genuine element in it. The same
vein of chivalrous sentiment gives a fine tone to some of
Massinger's other plays; to <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, for example, and
<hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, in both of which the treatment
of lovers' devotion shows a higher sense of the virtue of
feminine dignity and purity than is common in the contemporary
stage.</q></note>
I reply to that apostle of common sense that I am
not only charmed and delighted, but invigorated. And
why? Because I am admitted to a world of heroism
and romance.
</p>

<p>
But may we not put the matter more broadly still?
When we read the Cavalier lyrics of Suckling, Herrick,
and Lovelace, when we think of Falkland, when we stand
before the portraits of Vandyck, do we not feel that
modern England was in danger until lately of losing
something? There is an aroma there of chivalry which
had almost faded from our ken. And yet there is an
element in our shy and dumb English nature to which
this atmosphere is congenial, however overgrown with
money-making our minds had seemed to be. Nor, as the
student of history knows well, had the Puritans in the
Civil War the monopoly of religion and duty. Indeed,
the Civil War was a true tragedy, because both sides had
right, both fought and bled for what they believed to be
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
the truth. To-day, in spite of our many domestic discords,
no party spirit discounts the gallant deeds of
which we have read daily, and of which of necessity only
a fraction has been publicly rewarded. Perhaps the
flame of romance will breathe once more in our midst,
now the War is over, purified by suffering, and quickened
by the memory of those serene yet manly spirits whom
we have lost on the battlefield, whose departure in the
dayspring of life seems, as it were, to have extinguished
so many stars in the vault of heaven. They put aside
the calls of culture and pleasure, and the natural ambition
to do something in the world before they were
abolished by death. They have willingly given for their
country all that they had; they have given themselves.
If we remember their devotion with gratitude it may
purify us from the commonplace, the vulgar, and the
selfish. They, at any rate, can address the power of evil,
which for the moment seemed to triumph, in the words
of Dorothea:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>What is this life to me? Not worth, a thought:</l>
<l>Or, if it be esteem'd, 'tis that I lose it</l>
<l>To win a better; even thy malice serves</l>
<l>To me but as a ladder to mount up</l>
<l>To such a height of happiness, where I shall</l>
<l>Look down with scorn on thee and on the world;</l>
<l>Where, circled with true pleasures, placed above</l>
<l>The reach of death or time, 'twill be my glory</l>
<l>To think at what an easy price I bought it.</l>
<l>There's a perpetual spring, perpetual youth;</l>
<l>No joint-benumbing cold, or scorching heat,</l>
<l>Famine, nor age, have any being there.</l>
<l>Forget for shame your Tempe; bury in</l>
<l>Oblivion your feign'd Hesperian orchards;</l>
<l>The golden fruit, kept by the watchful dragon,</l>
<l>Which did require a Hercules to get it,</l>
<l>Compared with what grows in all plenty there,</l>
<l>Deserves not to be named. The Power I serve</l>
<l>Laughs at your happy Araby, or the</l>
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
<l>Elysian shades; for He hath made His bowers</l>
<l>Better in deed than you can fancy yours.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, IV., 3, 72-92. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. Believe As You
List</hi>, IV., 2, 183-204.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
As an instance of Massinger's courtliness I will quote
a short passage from <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>: Contarino
has come from the court of the Duke to fetch his
nephew Giovanni, who has been brought up by a tutor,
Charomonte by name, in the country. As the prince
comes in, Charomonte addresses Contarino:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Charomonte.</hi> Make your approaches boldly; you will find</l>
<l>A courteous entertainment. (<hi rend='smallcaps'>Contarino</hi> <hi rend='italic'>kneels</hi>.)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Giovanni.</hi>      Pray you, forbear</l>
<l>My hand, good signior; 'tis a ceremony</l>
<l>Not due to me. 'Tis fit we should embrace</l>
<l>With mutual arms.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Contarino.</hi>   It is a favour, sir,</l>
<l>I grieve to be denied.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Giovanni.</hi>        You shall o'ercome;</l>
<l>But 'tis your pleasure, not my pride, that grants it.</l>
<l>Nay, pray you, guardian and good sir, put on;</l>
<l>How ill it shews to have that reverend head</l>
<l>Uncover'd to a boy!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Charomonte.</hi>        Your excellence</l>
<l>Must give me liberty, to observe the distance</l>
<l>And duty that I owe you.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 103-114. The whole play exhibits this element of
grace more than any other of our author. It should be
acted by Lysis and Charicles, Glaucon and Adeimantus.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Take another instance, from <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Sforza.</hi>          Excuse me, good Pescara.</l>
<l>Ere long I will wait on you.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Pescara.</hi>           You speak, sir,</l>
<l>The language I should use.<note place='foot'>IV., 3, 175. It is to be noted that great courtesy is
observed and expected in greetings and leave-takings in
Massinger's plays. Thus in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, II., 2,
Macrinus gets into trouble for the curtness of his salutation;
similarly, Wellborn in <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, V., 1, 114. Compare also
<hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, IV., 1, 67; <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, I., l, 147.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>

<p>
And this, from The Bashful Lover:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Farnese.</hi>                Madam, I am bold</l>
<l>To trench so far upon your privacy</l>
<l>As to desire my friend (let not that wrong him,</l>
<l>For he's a worthy one) may have the honour</l>
<l>To kiss your hand.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Matilda.</hi>           His own worth challenges</l>
<l>A greater favour.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Farn.</hi>             Your acknowledgment</l>
<l>Confirms it, madam.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 246.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I have used the word <q>lucid</q> of Massinger's style;
perhaps a more appropriate word would be dexterous; not
that he is obscure like Chapman, or like Shakspere in his
later manner, far less turgid, but he is not afraid of somewhat
long sentences. What he is really afraid of, unlike
Fletcher, is a full-stop at the end of the verse. There
are two devices which the reader will notice, often in
combination; in the first place, Massinger is very fond
of the <q>absolute</q> construction, and loves to multiply
parentheses. The following passages from <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>
will serve as illustrations:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Furnace.</hi> She keeps her chamber, dines with a panada,</l>
<l>Or water gruel, my sweat never thought on.<note place='foot'>I., 2, 36.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Woman.</hi> And the first command she gave, after she rose,</l>
<l>Was, her devotions done, to give her notice</l>
<l>When you approach'd here.<note place='foot'>II., 2, 71.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or again, from <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Astraea once more lives upon the earth,</l>
<l>Pulcheria's breast her temple.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 77.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or from <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>:
</p>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 18'>And, to those that stay,</l>
<l>A competence of land freely allotted</l>
<l>To each man's proper use, no lord acknowledged.<note place='foot'>IV., 2, 96.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
We find the <q>absolute</q> construction occasionally in
Shakspere, as in <hi rend='italic'>The Merchant of Venice</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>So are those crisped snaky golden locks</l>
<l>Which make such wanton gambols with the wind,</l>
<l>Upon supposed fairness, often known</l>
<l>To be the dowry of a second head,</l>
<l>The skull that bred them in the sepulchre.<note place='foot'>III., 2, 92.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or in <hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Folded the writ up in form of the other,</l>
<l>Subscribed it, gav't th' impression, placed it safely,</l>
<l>The changeling never known.<note place='foot'>V., 2, 51.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
A passage from <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi> will show an elaborate
use of parenthesis:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 14'>What though my father</l>
<l>Writ man before he was so, and confirm'd it,</l>
<l>By numbering that day no part of his life</l>
<l>In which he did not service to his country;</l>
<l>Was he to be free therefore from the laws</l>
<l>And ceremonious form in your decrees?</l>
<l>Or else because he did as much as man,</l>
<l>In those three memorable overthrows,</l>
<l>At Granson, Morat, Nancy, where his master,</l>
<l>The warlike Charalois, with whose misfortunes</l>
<l>I bear his name, lost treasure, men, and life,</l>
<l>To be excused from payment of those sums</l>
<l>Which (his own patrimony spent) his zeal</l>
<l>To serve his country forced him to take up!<note place='foot'>I., 2, 162-175.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Compare also these lines from <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 16'>And if you shew not</l>
<l>An appetite, and a strong one, I'll not say</l>
<l>To eat it, but devour it, without grace too,</l>
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
<l>For it will not stay a preface, I am shamed,</l>
<l>And all my past provocatives will be jeer'd at.<note place='foot'>II., 3, 28-32.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
From <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Honoria.</hi> That you please, sir,</l>
<l>With such assurances of love and favour,</l>
<l>To grace your handmaid, but in being yours, sir,</l>
<l>A matchless queen, and one that knows herself so,</l>
<l>Binds me in retribution to deserve</l>
<l>The grace conferr'd upon me.<note place='foot'>I., 2, 136-141.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
From <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Paulo.</hi> This friend was plighted to a beauteous woman,</l>
<l>(Nature proud of her workmanship) mutual love</l>
<l>Possessed them both, her heart in his heart lodged</l>
<l>And his in hers.<note place='foot'>IV., 2, 46.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
From <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Alonzo.</hi>   By me, his nephew,</l>
<l>He does salute you fairly, and entreats</l>
<l>(A word not suitable to his power and greatness)</l>
<l>You would consent to tender that, which he</l>
<l>Unwillingly must force, if contradicted.<note place='foot'>I., 2, 17.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
From <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 14'>What coy she, then,</l>
<l>Though great in birth, not to be parallel'd</l>
<l>For nature's liberal bounties, (both set off</l>
<l>With fortune's trappings, wealth); but, with delight,</l>
<l>Gladly acknowledged such a man her servant?<note place='foot'>I., 5, 44. The longest series of parentheses in Massinger
is to be found in Cardenes' speech in <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi> (I., 1,
240-256). For clumsy periods see <hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry</hi>, IV., 2, 99-104;
V., 2, 23-34; <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, IV., 2, 123-128.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It has been pointed out by Zielinski that <q>the perfection
of language in regard to the formation of periods
depends upon the presence and prevalence of abbreviated
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
by-sentences,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Our Debt to Antiquity</hi>, Eng. trans, by Strong and Stewart,
p. 75.</note> by which expression he describes <q>absolute</q>
constructions.
</p>

<p>
Secondly, he delights in an expedient which the poems
of Robert Browning have made familiar to this generation,
the frequent omission of the relative pronoun.<note place='foot'>It is needless to say how common this idiom is in Shakspere,
Webster, Shirley, and other authors of the period. I
only mention it because it lends itself in a peculiar way to the
suppleness of Massinger's style.</note> And so
his sentences meander with a seemingly negligent grace
to an unexpected conclusion. It is clear that such a
style both requires and repays a careful study of the
rhetorical art.
</p>

<p>
I give as an instance of this combination the words of
Paulinus in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>. He is talking of the
Emperor's sister and Prime Minister Pulcheria:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'>She indeed is</l>
<l>A perfect phœnix, and disdains a rival.</l>
<l>Her infant years, as you know, promised much,</l>
<l>But grown to ripeness she transcends, and makes</l>
<l>Credulity her debtor. I will tell you</l>
<l>In my blunt way, to entertain the time</l>
<l>Until you have the happiness to see her,</l>
<l>How in your absence she hath borne herself,</l>
<l>And with all possible brevity; though the subject</l>
<l>Is such a spacious field, as would require</l>
<l>An abstract of the purest eloquence</l>
<l>(Deriv'd from the most famous orators</l>
<l>The nurse of learning, Athens, shew'd the world)</l>
<l>In that man that should undertake to be</l>
<l>Her true historian.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 18-32.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The style of Massinger is not only lucid and dexterous;
it is strong, partly because of its ease, and more mature
and modern than that of many of his contemporaries.
Milton's prose would have gained much in directness if he
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
had studied Massinger. This strength does not show
itself so much in isolated fine lines, for, as we have already
seen, epigram was foreign to his nature, though from time
to time we get such lines, as, for example, in <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of
Milan</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>One smile of hers would make a savage tame;</l>
<l>One accent of that tongue would calm the seas,</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Though all the winds at once strove there for empire</hi>.<note place='foot'>I., 3, 339.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or, again, in the same play:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>How coldly you receive it! I expected</l>
<l>The mere relation of so great a blessing,</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Borne proudly on the wings of sweet revenge</hi>,</l>
<l>Would have call'd on a sacrifice of thanks.<note place='foot'>V., 1, 25.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or, again, in <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Overreach.</hi> The garments of her widowhood laid by,</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>She now appears as glorious as the spring</hi>.<note place='foot'>III., 3, 4.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Or in <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Could I imp feathers to the wings of time,</l>
<l>Or with as little ease command the sun</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>To scourge his coursers up heaven's eastern hill</hi>.<note place='foot'>V., 2, 22.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
We may remark in passing that Massinger's best single
lines are usually decasyllabic.
</p>

<p>
It has been remarked by Mr. Swinburne, whose discerning
judgment of the Jacobean dramatists has lavished
just praise on Massinger's art and style, that in the second
act of <hi rend='italic'>Sir John Van Olden Barnavelt</hi>, <q>the student will
say, <q>This tune goes manly,</q></q> and it is remarkable that
our poet had formed in 1619 the style which marked him
to the end of his life.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Contemporaries of Shakespeare</hi>, p. 183. Though I do
not accept all Mr. Swinburne's estimates, I am at once pleased
and humiliated at the thought that he has expressed so much
better than myself many of my conclusions about Massinger.</note>
</p>

<p>
An instance of this simple strength may be given from
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
<hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>, where Luke debates whether he shall
agree to the proposition of the pretended Indians:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Luke.</hi> Give me leave&mdash;(<hi rend='italic'>walks aside</hi>)</l>
<l>I would not lose this purchase. A grave matron!</l>
<l>And two pure virgins! Umph, I think my sister,</l>
<l>Though proud, was ever honest, and my nieces</l>
<l>Untainted yet. Why should not they be shipp'd</l>
<l>For this employment? They are burthensome to me,</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>And eat too much</hi>.<note place='foot'>V., 1, 51.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
When rudeness is necessary it is uttered with some
vigour, as in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>, where this is what Romont
gets for his well-meant pains:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Rochfort.</hi>      Sir, if you please</l>
<l>To bear yourself as fits a gentleman,</l>
<l>The house is at your service; but if not,</l>
<l>Though you seek company elsewhere, your absence</l>
<l>Will not be much lamented.<note place='foot'>III., 1, 302.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The rejected lover in such a scene as the following has no
illusions left him:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Mustapha.</hi>       All happiness&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Donusa.</hi>            Be sudden.</l>
<l>'Twas saucy rudeness in you, sir, to press</l>
<l>On my retirements; but ridiculous folly</l>
<l>To waste the time that might be better spent,</l>
<l>In complimental wishes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Corisca.</hi>   There's a cooling</l>
<l>For his hot encounter! (<hi rend='italic'>aside</hi>)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Donusa.</hi>    Come you here to stare?</l>
<l>If you have lost your tongue and use of speech,</l>
<l>Resign your government; there's a mute's place void</l>
<l>In my uncle's court, I hear; and you may want me</l>
<l>To write for your preferment.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, III., 1, 30-39.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Two minor features of Massinger's style may be mentioned
here:
</p>

<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>

<p>
1. The catalogue line, so familiar to the student of
Lucretius&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, I., 2, 85. The sapphire, ruby, jacinth,</l>
<l>amber, coral.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'><hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>     II, 2, 312. All circumstances,</l>
<l>Answers, despatches, doubts, and difficulties.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, V., I, 59. The comfortable names of breakfasts,</l>
<l>dinners,</l>
<l>Collations, supper, beverage.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Emperor of East</hi>, 2 Prol., 8. With his best of fancy, judgment,</l>
<l>language, art.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I., 2, 194. To his merchant, mercer, draper,</l>
<l>His linen-man, and tailor.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>V., 2, 88. As sacred, glorious, high, invincible.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, II., 1, 72. Tissue, gold, silver, velvets, satins,</l>
<l>taffetas.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>IV., 3, 69. Entreaties, curses, prayers, or imprecations.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, II., 1, 128. All respect,</l>
<l>Love, fear, and reverence cast</l>
<l>off.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, II., 1, 7. We of necessity must be</l>
<l>chaste, wise, fair.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
2. A more marked feature is the repetition of words or
short phrases in various parts of the line.<note place='foot'>Oliphant (<hi rend='italic'>Englische Studien</hi>, xiv., 60) notes this feature as
Fletcherian.</note> The following
instances may be given from (<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of
Florence</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I., 1, 154. It is the duke!</l>
<l>The duke.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I., 2, 41. Our duchess; such a duchess.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I., 2, 95. See, signiors, see our care.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I., 2, 131. Take up, take up.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>II., 1, 71. Fie! fie! the princess.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 1, 102. Tells</l>
<l>His son, this is the prince, the hopeful prince.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>:
</p>

<lg>
<l>II., 1, 58.  I blush for you,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>Blush at your poverty of spirit.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 1, 11. I am starv'd,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>Starv'd in my pleasures.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>V., 1, 12.   Far, far above your hopes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>V., 1, 81.   The height</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>Of honour, principal honour.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>V., 2, 67.   A manor pawn'd,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>Pawn'd, my good lord.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And, thirdly, the versification of Massinger is musical
and melodious. Boyle says that Milton's blank verse
owes much to the study of it. <q>In the indefinable
touches which make up the music of a verse, in the artistic
distribution of pauses, and in the unerring choice and
grouping of just those words which strike the ear as the
perfection of harmony, there are, if we leave Cyril Tourneur's
<hi rend='italic'>Atheist's Tragedy</hi> out of the question, only two
masters in the drama, Shakspere in his latest period and
Massinger.</q><note place='foot'>Boyle, <hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, Trans., p. 378.</note> Coleridge says that it is <q>an excellent
metre, a better model for dramatists in general to imitate
than Shakspere's. Read Massinger aright, and measure
by time, not syllables, and no lines can be more legitimate,
none in which the substitution of equipollent feet, and
the modifications by emphasis, are managed with such
exquisite judgment.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>, p. 403.</note> Be it noted that this praise
comes from a master of his art, for no one who has once
appreciated Coleridge's command of vowel-syzygy and
the velvet-like texture of his blank verse can refuse him
that title.
</p>

<p>
Massinger's blank verse is equal to all the emotions
which the author can express and kindle. It never fails
him, nor, on the other hand, does it obtrude itself unduly
on the sense conveyed. Only after reading a considerable
passage of our poet do we understand how much the
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
versification contributes to his lifelike and dignified
atmosphere.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, the metre of Massinger is admirably suited
to his style. There seems a hidden but real harmony
between them. Some might call his metre at times
slipshod and undignified, from the fact that, except in
elevated passages, the characters speak in rhythmical
sentences which approximate to prose. Boyle, who
declares that <q>Marlowe and Massinger are the two extremes
of the metrical movement in the dramatists,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E. S.</hi>, vii. 70.</note> has
pointed out that <q>Massinger's blank verse shows a larger
proportion of run-on lines and double endings in harmonious
union than any of his contemporaries.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, xxvi. 584. The <q>run-on</q> line ends with
a preposition or other word which syntactically requires the
next line. Take as an example <hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry</hi>, V., 2, 255:
</p>
<p>
For the fact, as of<lb/>
The former, I confess it; but with what<lb/>
Base wrongs I was unwillingly drawn to it,<lb/>
To my few words there are some other proofs<lb/>
To witness this for truth.
</p>
<p>
The <q>double</q> or <q>feminine</q> ending is the outstanding
feature of Fletcher's verse. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry</hi>, V., 2, 137:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rochfort.</hi> You say you are sorry for him;<lb/>
A grief in which I must not have a partner.<lb/>
'Tis I alone am sorry, that when I raised<lb/>
The building of my life, for seventy years,<lb/>
Upon so sure a ground, that all the vices<lb/>
Practised to ruin man, though brought against me,<lb/>
Could never undermine, and no way left<lb/>
To send these grey hairs to the grave with sorrow,<lb/>
Virtue, that was my patroness, betrayed me.
</p>
<p>
(Gifford inserts <q>when</q> in that third line.)
</p>
<p>
Five instances in nine lines. Fleay (<hi rend='italic'>Shakespeare Manual</hi>,
p. 171) points out that in Shakspere's part of <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>
the proportion of double endings to blank verse is 1 to 3;
in Fletcher's, 1 to 1·7. The weak and sugary effect of
double endings is very apparent in Rowe's <hi rend='italic'>Fair Penitent</hi>,
the eighteenth-century play, based on <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>.
</p>
<p>
Boyle (<hi rend='italic'>E. S.</hi>, v. 74) takes six of Massinger's plays: <hi rend='italic'>The
Unnatural Combat</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The
City Madam</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>. These
are his conclusions: <q>The plays show in general a high percentage
of double endings, generally 40 per cent, or more.
The percentage of run-on lines is a little lower, but seldom
sinks for more than a scene below 30 per cent. The light and
weak endings together make 5 to 7 per cent. The versification
is exquisitely musical. There are very few rhymes.</q>
The corresponding figures for Fletcher are: double endings,
over 50 per cent.; run-on lines, under 20 per cent.; and light
and weak endings almost negligible; rhyme, rare. Shakspere
in his later manner (e.g., <hi rend='italic'>The Tempest</hi>) has 33 per cent.
double endings. (<hi rend='italic'>E. S.</hi>, vi. 71.)</p></note> Cartwright
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
and Tourneur have more run-on lines, but not so
many double endings. Fletcher has more double endings,
but very few run-on lines. Shakspere and Beaumont
alone exhibit a somewhat similar metrical style.</q><note place='foot'>Fleay (<hi rend='italic'>Shakespeare Manual</hi>, p. 123) takes a piece of
Dryden's <hi rend='italic'>All for Love</hi>, and rewrites it, as far as metre (and
metre only) is concerned, in the styles of Fletcher, Beaumont,
Massinger, Greene, and Rowley.</note> This
is interesting, because we shall see later on that Massinger
was a devoted admirer and imitator of Shakspere in
thought, device, and expression. It is not strange, therefore,
that he should also copy his metre, or rather, develop
his own on the same lines. To show how flexible and
dexterous the metre of Massinger is, I will give two instances
from <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>. In the first Uberti
encourages Gonzaga to persevere with the contest:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Uberti.</hi> Sir, these tears</l>
<l>Do well become a father, and my eyes</l>
<l>Would keep you company as a forlorn lover,</l>
<l>But that the burning fire of my revenge</l>
<l>Dries up those drops of sorrow. We, once more,</l>
<l>Our broken forces rallied up, and with</l>
<l>Full numbers strengthen'd, stand prepared t' endure</l>
<l>A second trial; nor let it dismay us</l>
<l>That we are once again t' affront the fury</l>
<l>Of a victorious army; their abuse</l>
<l>Of conquest hath disarm'd them, and call'd down</l>
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
<l>The Powers above to aid us. I have read</l>
<l>Some piece of story, yet ne'er found but that</l>
<l>The general, that gave way to cruelty,</l>
<l>The profanation of things sacred, rapes</l>
<l>Of virgins, butchery of infants, and</l>
<l>The massacre in cold blood of reverend age,</l>
<l>Against the discipline and law of arms,</l>
<l>Did feel the hand of heaven lie heavy on him</l>
<l>When most secure.<note place='foot'>IV., 3, 5-24.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In the second Gonzaga refuses the hand of his daughter
Matilda to Lorenzo:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gonzaga.</hi> Two main reasons</l>
<l>(Seconding those you have already heard)</l>
<l>Give us encouragement; the duty that</l>
<l>I owe my mother country, and the love</l>
<l>Descending to my daughter. For the first,</l>
<l>Should I betray her liberty, I deserv'd</l>
<l>To have my name with infamy razed from</l>
<l>The catalogue of good princes; and I should</l>
<l>Unnaturally forget I am a father,</l>
<l>If, like a Tartar, or for fear or profit,</l>
<l>I should consign her, as a bondwoman,</l>
<l>To be disposed of at another's pleasure;</l>
<l>Her own consent or favour never sued for,</l>
<l>And mine by force exacted. No, Alonzo,</l>
<l>She is my only child, my heir; and if</l>
<l>A father's eyes deceive me not, the hand</l>
<l>Of prodigal nature hath given so much to her,</l>
<l>As, in the former ages, kings would rise up</l>
<l>In her defence and make her cause their quarrel;</l>
<l>Nor can she, if that any spark remain</l>
<l>To kindle a desire to be possess'd</l>
<l>Of such a beauty, in our time, want swords</l>
<l>To guard it safe from violence.<note place='foot'>I., 2, 49-71.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Anyone who compares the metre of Massinger with that
of Fletcher will find that our author observes far stricter
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
laws than his friend. The plays of Massinger abound in
lines divided between two speakers, or even three, which,
nevertheless, observe the strict rule of the metre.<note place='foot'>In this respect Massinger resembles Beaumont and Ford,
whose metre in divided lines, unlike Webster's and Fletcher's,
is very regular. Shirley's plays are full of lame lines. For strict
division <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, I., 3, 44; II., 1, 109; V., 1, 4 and 70;
V., 2, 66; V., 3, 126; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I., 1, 80, 221, 308; II., 3,
116; III., 2, 61; IV., 3, 16; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, I., 2, 48 and 63;
II., 2, 151; III., 2, 241; V., 1, 233; <hi rend='italic'>Very Woman</hi>, I., 1, 26
and 147; V., 6, 31; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, I., 1, 114, 163, and
207; II., 2, 36, 37; II., 3, 9; II., 4, 42; III., 1, 99; III., 3, 71
and 80; V., 1, 39, 40, 48, 50, 176; <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, I., 3, 32.
Instances can be given of lines divided between four speakers&mdash;e.g.,
<hi rend='italic'>Very Woman</hi>, V., 3, 23; V., 4, 167; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, II.,
7, 20; <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, I., 4, 50; IV., 1, 83; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, V., 4, 209.
The carelessness of the metre in <hi rend='italic'>The Old Law</hi> is in itself proof
that Massinger had little to do with it.</note>
</p>

<p>
The way in which Massinger's style and metre suit one
another can best be illustrated by a passage or two from
<hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>; the first is where Bellisant speaks
about the decay of chivalry.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bellisant.</hi>                    Ere they durst</l>
<l>Presume to offer service to a lady,</l>
<l>In person they perform'd some gallant acts</l>
<l>The fame of which prepar'd them gracious hearing,</l>
<l>Ere they made their approaches; what coy she, then,<note place='foot'>An instance of <q>emphatic</q> double-ending (<hi rend='italic'>Oliphant</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>E. S.</hi>, xiv., 71), common in Fletcher, rare in Massinger.</note></l>
<l>Though great in birth, not to be parallel'd</l>
<l>For nature's liberal beauties (both set off</l>
<l>With fortune's trappings, wealth); but with delight,</l>
<l>Gladly acknowledg'd such a man her servant,</l>
<l>To whose heroic courage and deep wisdom,</l>
<l>The flourishing commonwealth, and thankful king,</l>
<l>Confess'd themselves for debtors? Whereas, now,</l>
<l>If you have travelled Italy, and brought home</l>
<l>Some remnants of the language, and can set</l>
<l>Your faces in some strange and ne'er-seen posture,</l>
<l>Dance a la volta, and be rude and saucy,</l>
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
<l>Protest and swear and damn (for these are acts</l>
<l>That most think grace them), and then view yourselves</l>
<l>In the deceiving mirror of self-love,</l>
<l>You do conclude there hardly is a woman</l>
<l>That can be worthy of you.<note place='foot'>I., 5, 38.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The second is a speech of Leonora exposing Cleremond's
baseness:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>I, burning then with a most virtuous anger,</l>
<l>Razed from my heart the memory of his name,</l>
<l>Railed and spit at him; and knew 'twas justice</l>
<l>That I should take those deities he scorn'd,</l>
<l>Hymen and Cupid, into my protection,</l>
<l>And be the instrument of their revenge;</l>
<l>And so I cast him off, scorn'd his submission,</l>
<l>His poor and childish winnings, will'd my servants</l>
<l>To shut my gates against him; but, when neither</l>
<l>Disdain, hate, or contempt could free me from</l>
<l>His loathsome importunities, and fired too</l>
<l>To wreak mine injur'd honour, I took gladly</l>
<l>Advantage of his execrable oaths,</l>
<l>To undergo what penance I enjoin'd him;</l>
<l>Then, to the terror of all future ribalds,</l>
<l>That make no difference between love and lust,</l>
<l>Imposed this task upon him. I have said, too;</l>
<l>Now, when you please, a censure.<note place='foot'>V., 1, 226.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The critics may differ in their estimate of Massinger's
style and metre; but it is simple truth to say that they
are unique in our literature, in their correctness, dignity,
ease, and classical frugality.
</p>

<p>
Let us now turn to the poet's faults. It is said that
his range of thought is limited, and this may be at once
conceded. It might also be said that Greek tragedy is
limited, and the statement is true of all our Elizabethan
playwrights; yet we return to them again and again, for
they have something to give us which we cannot do without.
It is idle to depreciate one period of our literature
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
at the expense of another. Are not the old madrigal
writers limited, and Farrant and Byrd, Orlando Gibbons
and Blow? and yet we enjoy them; nay, to take even
Purcell himself, when we confess that the pleasure he
gives us is due to the fact that he is more daring, less
shackled than his generation, <q>so modern</q> as we say,
are we not in the end forced to confess that he too is
unmistakably limited, <q>bewrayed</q> by his quaint and
stately rhythms to be one of the seventeenth century?
</p>

<p>
Our age has a wider and subtler range of psychology;
to revert from <q>The Georgian Poets</q> of 1911 to Massinger
is like going back from the films of a cinema palace
to a tondo of Luca Signorelli. Both films and tondo have
their uses. We may take a single illustration of this
point from <hi rend='italic'>The Brothers Karamazov</hi>. The great Russian
novelist, among other problems, deals in that book with
the case of the young man who is in love with two women
at once. That is the sort of complicated interest which
we do not expect our Elizabethan writers to cope with,
in as great detail as a modern writer uses. The problem
occurs in <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, where the heroine, Cleora, is distracted
between her plighted love to Leosthenes and her
warm sense of obligation to Marullo;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Matilda in <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi> (IV., 3, 170), and
Olinda in <hi rend='italic'>The Lovers' Progress</hi>.</note> it is interesting and
instructive to see how simply the whole thing is touched
upon, and how soon the doubt is solved by the discovery
of Leosthenes' former intrigue with Statilia. May we
not say, with Aristophanes, in comparing Massinger and
Dostoevsky:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Τὸν μὲν γὰρ ἡγοῦμαι σοφόν, τῷ δ ἥδομαι.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, l. 1413.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Then it is said that Massinger's work is not free from
coarseness. The answer to this accusation may be made
in more ways than one. I might with confidence reply
to such critics: If you wish for real vulgarity of diction,
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
read Marston; if you wish for real vulgarity of mind, read
Middleton; if you wish for poisoned morals, read Ford and
Tourneur; and then revise your judgment of Massinger.
It is notorious that all the stage writers of the Elizabethan
age are tarred with the same brush; there is much in
Shakspere himself that we wish he had not written; still
more is this true of Ben Jonson. In <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>,
where we have the odious servants, Hircius and Spungius,
it is generally believed that the parts of the play in which
they appear are due to Dekker, not to Massinger, whose
other works present nothing so disgusting. There are, at
any rate, no lapses of taste in Massinger like those which
we find in Fletcher; nothing like the fate of Rutilio in
<hi rend='italic'>The Custom of the Country</hi>, or of Merione in <hi rend='italic'>The Queen of
Corinth</hi>, or of the Father in <hi rend='italic'>The Captain</hi>. It must be
confessed that Massinger's conception of love is apt to
be earthly, physical, sensuous; there is but little in his
plays about the marriage of true minds,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> the dialogue in <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, I., 1, 1-24. <q>Heaven's
greatest blessings</q> (line 21) is a very characteristic phrase.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, II., 1, 216.</note> too much about
<q>Hymen's taper</q> and <q>virgin forts.</q> Captivated by
the charms of female beauty, his intellect is too concrete
in its ideals to rise above mere morality to the mysteries
of the diviner love. So far it must be allowed that his
art interests and stimulates the passions of his audience
without elevating them. But if at times we feel a monotonous
limitation in his outlook in these matters, if we
miss the healthy breezes of bracing commonsense and
cheerful self-restraint, we are never pained by the triumph
of what is low, corrupt, or morbid.
</p>

<p>
When it is said that his women are impure it is necessary
to enter a clear protest.<note place='foot'>Boyle (<hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, 385-88) is severe but not, to my mind,
convincing. Reading between the lines, one arrives at the
conclusion that Boyle admired Massinger enormously, and
would have allowed none else to abuse him except himself.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> his spirited attack on Charles Lamb's <q>unfair judgment</q>
(pp. 371-2).</note> There are offensive and
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
heartless women in Massinger, such as Domitia in <hi rend='italic'>The
Roman Actor</hi>, and Beaumelle in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>;<note place='foot'>Rubens took his wives as models for his art; let us hope
that Massinger's portrait of the imperious woman was not drawn
from his wife. We happen to know that he was married.</note>
there are odious old women, like Borachia and Corisca.
There are pert and vulgar ladies' maids; but you have only
to read <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The
Emperor of the East</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, to see that his world
includes some charming female characters&mdash;not, indeed,
so lovely as those of Shakspere, but still, types which show
that he had not lost his faith in human nature, as, when
we read Fielding, we feel regretfully almost obliged to
allow, in spite of Sophia Western and Amelia, is the case
with our great novelist.
</p>

<p>
It is true that there are ladies in Massinger's plays who
offer their hands in marriage to the men they love, and
very charmingly the thing is done, though there is nothing
equal to the scene between the Duchess and Antonio
in Webster's masterpiece; as, for example, Artemia in
<hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, the Duchess of Urbin in <hi rend='italic'>The Great
Duke</hi>, Calista in <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>.<note place='foot'>I., 1. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Matilda in <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi> (III., 3, 147),
and Donusa in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi> (II., 4).</note> This feature is not confined
to Massinger among the writers of his age; to mention
no other instances, what about Arethusa in <hi rend='italic'>Philaster</hi>,
Bianca in <hi rend='italic'>The Fair Maid of the Inn</hi>, Beliza and the Queen
in <hi rend='italic'>The Queen of Corinth</hi>,<note place='foot'>IV., 1; V., 4. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Thamasta in Ford's <hi rend='italic'>Lover's Melancholy</hi>
(III., 2), Calantha's request to her father in <hi rend='italic'>The Broken
Heart</hi> (IV., 3), Fiormonda in <hi rend='italic'>Love's Sacrifice</hi> (I., 2), Hidaspes
in <hi rend='italic'>Cupid's Revenge</hi> (I., 3).</note> Frank in <hi rend='italic'>The Captain</hi>, Clara in
<hi rend='italic'>Love's Cure</hi> (IV., 2), Martia in <hi rend='italic'>The Double Marriage</hi>
(II., 3), Lamira in <hi rend='italic'>The Honest Man's Fortune</hi> (V., 3), Erota
in <hi rend='italic'>The Laws of Candy</hi>? Or, what about Desdemona in
<hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>,<note place='foot'>Act I., 3.</note> or Olivia in <hi rend='italic'>Twelfth Night</hi>?<note place='foot'>III., 1, 161. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Romeo and Juliet</hi>, I., 5, 95.</note> What about the
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
plot of <hi rend='italic'>All's Well that Ends Well</hi>? To the vulgar mind
all things are vulgar. <foreign rend='italic'>Honi soit qui mal y pense.</foreign><note place='foot'>The situation is not unknown in modern fiction; take,
for example, <hi rend='italic'>Dr. Breen's Practice</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The House of Lynch</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Jebb's <hi rend='italic'>Bentley</hi>, p. 197.</note> It may
certainly be conceded that in some of Massinger's plays,
as, for instance, <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You
List</hi>, the feminine interest is comparatively slight.
Brander Matthews tells us that Massinger's women <q>are
all painted from the outside only</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>, p. 317.</note> <q>they are not convincing;
they lack essential womanliness.</q> This may be
due to the fault which the same critic points out in our
author, that <q>he is heavy-handed and coarse-fibred
ethically as well as æsthetically.</q> One may reply that if
the theatre be the mirror of life Massinger had an undoubted
right to bring bad women on the stage; there are
good and noble women also among his characters, and if
they are not <q>convincing,</q> perhaps we may quote
Coleridge's remark about Shakspere, that <q>he saw it
was the perfection of women to be characterless.</q> However
far our author may fall short of his great model in
grace, charm, and delicacy, he at any rate deserves
credit for having imagined female characters who are full
of passions and made of <q>flesh and blood.</q><note place='foot'>A favourite phrase of Massinger's&mdash;e.g., <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the
East</hi>, II., 1, 345; V., 2, 83; <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, II., 3, 112;
<hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, I., 1, 312; IV., 1, 110; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>,
II., 3, 77.</note>
</p>

<p>
Massinger resembles other dramatists of his age; at
times we feel that they talk like the little boys on the
links in Stevenson's <hi rend='italic'>Lantern-Bearers</hi>. But Massinger is a
robuster mind than Fletcher, for example; if he brings
vice upon the stage, and if he speaks too freely about
things which we prefer not to have mentioned, if <q>like
Hogarth, he enjoys his own portrayal of degrading vice
and its appalling consequences,</q><note place='foot'>B. Matthews, p. 318.</note> we must, to do him
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
justice, take his work as a whole. Indeed, most of the
critics have singled out as one of his special claims to
praise his sturdy morality,<note place='foot'>Especially Sir A. W. Ward (<hi rend='italic'>English Dramatic Literature</hi>,
iii., pp. 41-42). <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also G. C. Macaulay in <hi rend='italic'>Cambridge History
of English Literature</hi>, vol. vi., p. 121, and Schelling's verdict.</note> and the general effect on any
fair mind of a perusal of his plays is a conviction that he
loved virtue. Vitelli<note place='foot'>The Venetian in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>.</note> may make the best of both worlds,
but he converts Donusa, and faces death and torture with
fortitude. Goodness emerges from Massinger's plays,
sometimes compromised for the moment, but always
triumphant in the end. There is considerable outspokenness,
but not much lubricity, and no perverted morality.
Passages which offend can nearly always, as in Shakspere,
be omitted without damaging the course of the plot.
Moreover, as has often been pointed out, the works of
Massinger are almost wholly free from blasphemy and
profanity, and attacks on the clergy, such as moved the
wrath of Jeremy Collier in later times.
</p>

<p>
It may be a fanciful suggestion, but it is possible that
the drama of that day suffered from the fact that boys
took the female parts.<note place='foot'><p>Dr. Bradley (<hi rend='italic'>Oxford Lectures</hi>, pp. 373-4) minimizes the
objections to this custom, without, however, dwelling on the
moral problem. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Mr. Percy Simpson's remarks in
<hi rend='italic'>Shakspere's England</hi>, ii., p. 246.  Prynne deals with it
(<hi rend='italic'>Histriomastix</hi>, ed. 1633, pp. 214-216). He allows, reluctantly,
that <q>men actors in women's attire are not altogether so bad,
so discommendable as women stage-players,</q> but goes on to
say: <q>since both of them are evill, yea extremely vitious,
neither of them necessary, both superfluous as all playes and
players are; the superabundant sinfulnesse of the one, can
neither justifie the lawfulnesse, nor extenuate the wickednesse
of the other.... This should rather bee the conclusion, both
of them are abominable, both intolerable, neither of them
laudable or necessary; therefore both of them to bee abandoned,
neither of them henceforth to be tollerated among Christians.</q>
</p>
<p>
Ford, in <hi rend='italic'>Love's Sacrifice</hi> (III., 2), refers to the novelty of
women-antics&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, of women acting in masques. It is clear
that Queen Henrietta Maria, with her passion for appearing
on the stage in masques, however much she may have been
before the times, must have caused great scandal to the Puritan
party. The complications which sometimes arise from the use
of men for female parts may be illustrated from Middleton's
amusing play, <hi rend='italic'>The Widow</hi>, where Martia is disguised as a man,
Ansaldo, and, to escape further complications, is subsequently
disguised as a woman, <hi rend='italic'>being a boy all the time</hi>. We find the
same thing in the second Luce in <hi rend='italic'>The Wise Woman of Hogsdon</hi>.</p></note> No one would deny the artistic
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
loss thereby involved, but there was a moral loss as well.
It made it possible for things to be said that would not
have been said by men to women, still less by women to
men. It unconsciously invested the love-scenes with an
air of unreality and grossness. It prevented the relation
of the sexes from being depicted with that union of passion
and purity which, though difficult, is possible.
</p>

<p>
It has been said that Massinger is hard and metallic,
and devoid of pathos. This charge, again, is largely true.
You will not find in him scenes which clutch the heart
like those of <hi rend='italic'>Dr. Faustus</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>The Duchess of Malfi</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>The
Broken Heart</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>The Maid's Tragedy</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>The Wife for a
Month</hi>; you will not find the sublimity of Ordella's self-sacrifice
in <hi rend='italic'>Thierry and Theodoret</hi>, or the chivalry of <hi rend='italic'>A
Fair Quarrel</hi>; still less will you find anything so appalling
as the end of <hi rend='italic'>King Lear</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>Romeo and Juliet</hi>.
There is plenty of passion in Massinger; like the legendary
lion, he lashes with his tail, and you can almost see him in
the act; but his rhetoric does not entirely carry you away.
Let me recall the fine passage which was quoted just now
from <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>.</note> I hope everyone will allow
its eloquence; but the repetition of the commonplace
phrase, <q>we cannot help it,</q><note place='foot'>Though Massinger does not owe much to Chapman, it is
to be noted that this trick of repeating a phrase occurs several
times in Chapman's popular play, <hi rend='italic'>Bussy d'Ambois</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
III., 1., <q>He shall confess all, and you then may hang him,</q>
and towards the end of the same Act, <q>Ay, anything but
killing of the King;</q> and in <hi rend='italic'>The Conspiracy of Byron</hi>,
Act II., in La Fin's speech, <q>I can make good</q> four times
at the end of the line. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <q>Behold the Turk and his great
Empress</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tamburlaine</hi>, pt. I., V., 1; <q>I love my lord; let
that suffice for me</q> in Greene's <hi rend='italic'>Orlando Furioso</hi>, I., 1.</note> natural and forcible as it
is, falls short of the ideal grandeur at which the passage
aims. We feel that Fletcher could have made a finer
thing of the prison-scene in The <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>.
</p>

<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>

<p>
It is significant that the most tender passage in Massinger,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, III., 4.</note>
where Leonora bids Almira take consolation, has been
assigned by some to Fletcher. In other words, Massinger
is not in the front rank of genius, but no one would claim
for him such a place.
</p>

<p>
Again, one might urge that his plays are not stores of
worldly wisdom, like Shakspere's; his aphorisms are not
deep; they do not bite.<note place='foot'><p>A few instances of γνῶμαι may be given from Massinger;
his debt to Shakspere will be clear:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry</hi>, I., 1, 20:
</p>
<p>There is a minute<lb/>
When a man's presence speaks in his own cause<lb/>
More than the tongues of twenty advocates.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I., 1, 241:
</p>
<p>
For a flying foe<lb/>
Discreet and provident conquerors build up<lb/>
A bridge of gold.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, IV., 1, 99:
</p>
<p>
O dear madam,<lb/>
We are all the balls of time, toss'd to and fro,<lb/>
From the plough unto the throne, and back again;<lb/>
Under the swing of destiny mankind suffers.
</p>
<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Plautus' Captivi</hi>, Prologue, 22, <q>Enimvero di nos quasi
pilas homines habent;</q> <hi rend='italic'>Pericles</hi>, II., 1, 63; and <hi rend='italic'>The Duchess
of Malfi</hi>, p. 99<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Bees</hi>, char, vii.)
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, IV., 1, 69:
</p>
<p>
Fortune rules all;<lb/>
We are her tennis-balls.
</p>
<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Greg's <hi rend='italic'>Henslowe Papers</hi>, p. 143.)
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, III., 2, 3:
</p>
<p>
A diamond,<lb/>
Though set in horn, is still a diamond<lb/>
And sparkles, as in purest gold.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Very Woman</hi>, IV., 1, 90:
</p>
<p>
Revenge, that thirsty dropsy of our souls,<lb/>
Which makes us covet that which hurts us most,<lb/>
Is not alone sweet, but partakes of tartness.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, I., 1, 60:
</p>
<p>
Dangers that we see<lb/>
To threaten ruin, are with ease prevented;<lb/>
But those strike deadly that come unexpected.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, III., 1, 138:
</p>
<p>
Love<lb/>
Steals sometimes through the ear into the heart,<lb/>
As well as by the eye.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 1, 79:
</p>
<p>
Ill news, madam,<lb/>
Are swallow-wing'd, but what's good walks on crutches.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, IV., 1, 103:
</p>
<p>
Pleasures forc'd<lb/>
Are unripe apples; sour, not worth the plucking.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, IV., 1, 187:
</p>
<p>
Though I must grant<lb/>
Riches, well-got, to be a useful servant,<lb/>
But a bad master.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I., 3, 100:
</p>
<p>
He that would govern others, first should be<lb/>
The master of himself, richly endu'd<lb/>
With depth of understanding, height of courage,<lb/>
And those remarkable graces which I dare not<lb/>
Ascribe unto myself.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, III., 1, 6:
</p>
<p>
But turbulent spirits, raised beyond themselves<lb/>
With ease, are not so soon laid; they oft prove<lb/>
Dangerous to him that call'd them up.
</p></note> Consequently he does not lend
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
himself to quotation. Yet this does not of necessity detract
from his greatness. No one would question the
excellence of the <hi rend='italic'>Waverley Novels</hi>, but Leslie Stephen has
pointed out that we only make one quotation from Scott's
novels.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hours in a Library</hi>, i., p. 167.</note> Aristotle has told us that <q>excessive brilliance
of diction obscures characters and sentiments.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Poetics</hi>, 1460<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 4.</note> There
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
are few passages of high poetical emotion in Massinger;
there is little magic in the rhythm of individual lines.
Like most of his contemporaries he shows at times a
strange insensibility to smooth rhythm in the heroic
couplet. He has an anapæstic lilt in various parts of the
line, inherited from Shakspere, and found in Milton's
early poems, which is not ineffective in its way, and which
seems to have aimed at varying the monotony of the ten-syllable
line.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <ref target='Appendix_VI'>Appendix VI.</ref> and the discussion in Robert Bridges'
<hi rend='italic'>Milton</hi>, Appendix D, pp. 56-57. The same thing is found again
and again in Shirley's <hi rend='italic'>Lady of Pleasure</hi>.</note> He has not much power of rhyme,<note place='foot'>For a rhymed passage <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, IV., 1, 141-152.</note> nor
are his plays studded with such lyrics as Shakspere and
Fletcher could write upon occasion.<note place='foot'>We have a few unimportant poems in rhyme from his
pen, which show the same characteristics of style as his
blank verse, though fettered by the restraints of the couplet.
Some of his songs are not at all bad; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>; for example, <hi rend='italic'>Emperor
of the East</hi>, V., 3: <q>Why art thou slow, thou rest of trouble,
Death?</q> <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, IV., 2, The songs of Juno and Hymen;
V., 1, the <q>entertainment of the Forest's Queen.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>,
II., 2, the song of Pallas; III., 5, song beginning, <q>The blushing
rose and purple flower.</q> It must, however, be conceded
that these songs are commonplace.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the comic element in Massinger is at times dull,
forced, and ordinary; it does not take us very far to label
a foolish Florentine gentleman with the name of <q>Sylli</q>;<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour.</hi> The same name is found in Ben Jonson's
unfortunate <hi rend='italic'>New Inn</hi>, produced in 1629. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>,
II., 2, 182:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Mary.</hi> Whose sheep are these, whose oxen? The Lady Plenty's.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Plenty.</hi> A plentiful pox upon you.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, IV., 2, 2:
</p>
<p>
Did not Master Marrall<lb/>
(He has marr'd all I am sure) strictly command us?
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, IV., 2, 68:
</p>
<p>
No, though the great Turk came, instead of turkies<lb/>
To beg any favour, I am inexorable.
</p></note>
the hungry soldier is rather a time-worn type,<note place='foot'>Belgrade in <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi>.</note> nor
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
can Greedy compare with Lazarillo. Though the situations
are humorous, we do not split with laughter over
Massinger, as we do in reading Aristophanes, or Shakspere,
or Molière.<note place='foot'>Boyle (<hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, pp. 588-9) points out that Massinger
<q>succeeds admirably in depicting the witty pertness of a
saucy page.</q> It does not, therefore, follow that he had been
one himself, as has been supposed by some.</note> We do not find in him the mercurial
lightness of <hi rend='italic'>A Trick to Catch the Old One</hi>, or the invincible
absurdity of <q>The Roarers</q> in <hi rend='italic'>The Fair Quarrel</hi>. But it
is necessary to remember that the comic business is of
the kind which gains by acting, or indeed requires it,
and to allow that towards the end of his life Massinger
came forward as a grave and powerful satirist of contemporary
men, reminding us of Ben Jonson, but, to my
mind, excelling him; for he shows less asperity with
greater lucidity and ease.<note place='foot'>In <hi rend='italic'>The New Way</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>.</note> He is not unduly morose or
bitter, yet he wins conviction with an admirable sanity
and sobriety. The plays will repay good acting, and, after
all, plays are meant to be acted; it is significant that the
last of Massinger's plays to hold the stage was his comedy,
<hi rend='italic'>The New Way to pay Old Debts</hi>, and it is very much to be
wished that it should be revived in England.<note place='foot'>Mr. Ben Greet's Company has from time to time given a
charming alfresco performance of <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some critics have accused Massinger of redundancy in
style, a characteristic which clearly will strike different
people in different ways. Thus, Hallam regards this
feature as on the whole meritorious, giving <q>fulness, or
what the painters would call impasto, to his style, and if
it might not always conduce to effect on the stage, suitable
on the whole to the character of his composition.</q> Mr.
Bullen,<note place='foot'>Preface to Sir John V. O. Barnavelt (<hi rend='italic'>Old Plays</hi>, vol. ii.,
p. 204).</note> after an eloquent tribute to <q>Massinger's admirable
ease and dignity,</q> and to <q>his rare command of an
excellent work-a-day dramatic style, clear, vigorous, and
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
free from conceit and affectation,</q> proceeds to allow that
<q>he is apt to grow didactic and tax the reader's patience;
and there is often a want of coherence in his sentences,
which amble down the page in a series of loosely linked
clauses.</q> I do not myself feel that this charge comes
to very much.
</p>

<p>
The real fault of Massinger lies in an imperfect presentation
of character. This point has been felt by many
writers, and put in various ways. Coleridge bluntly says:
<q>Massinger's characters have no character.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>, p. 405.</note> Brander
Matthews puts it in another way when he observes that
<q>the plots are not the result of the characters, but the work
of the playwright,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>, p. 312.</note> a criticism we may remark in passing
eminently applicable to Fletcher. It has been said that the
characters are conventional, like those in the Italian or
Spanish sources from which they are derived; the violent
tyrant and the arrogant queen are the most familiar of
these types. I do not think this statement arrives at the
root of the matter. Characters may be conventional and
yet interesting and lifelike. A great many of the personages
in Massinger's plays, important and unimportant
alike, act reasonably; he takes great pains to discriminate
them, and the effect is successful and consistent. Let us
recall the great characters in Massinger; they are Paris,
Luke, Sir Giles Overreach, Durazzo, Marullo, Malefort,
Charalois, Antiochus, Camiola, Dorothea, Donusa, Almira.
In the second rank we may put Timoleon, Romont, Bertoldo,
John Antonio, Mathias, Wellborn, Athenais, Marcelia,
Sophia, Cleora. Of these persons, the two that I
think most men would like to have known best are Paris
and Camiola. Notice, by the way, that there is seldom
more than one great character in a play. Now, in
<hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> there are three, the King, Catherine, and
Wolsey. The question arises whether Massinger, even
with Fletcher's help, could have worked on this scale. If
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
Massinger wrote <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> it is certainly, with all its
faults, his most remarkable achievement.
</p>

<p>
The point which I wish to emphasize is that there are
many characters in Massinger drawn with care and ability.
Think, for example, of the skilful contrast between
Pulcheria and Athenais in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>,
showing how easy it is for two good women to quarrel.
Further, it is clear that the attempt to produce composite
and developing characters is praiseworthy, even if it be
not always successful, because it is more true to life than
Ben Jonson's brilliant but illusory delineation of
<q>humours.</q> Human beings are too complex to be
labelled in this slapdash way, however amusing it may
be on the stage.
</p>

<p>
And yet we must allow that a certain number of the
more important characters act outrageously; the explanation
being that the faults which Massinger loves to portray
and censure are such as show themselves in outrageous
ways&mdash;such as anger, pride, impotence in the Latin sense,
uxoriousness, and above all jealousy.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Sforza in <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>; Theodosius in <hi rend='italic'>The
Emperor of the East</hi>; and especially, Leosthenes in <hi rend='italic'>The
Bondman</hi>.</note> Take the case
of Theophilus in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, who kills his daughters
because they have been reconverted to Christianity; or of
Domitian in <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>, who goes through life
killing people as he would kill flies. It is not enough to
say that there are such people in the world; the point is,
that in Massinger they shock us without appalling us.
Sforza behaves to Marcelia much as Othello behaves to
Desdemona; we feel at once a difference of power in the
two plays.<note place='foot'>The first quarto of <hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi> appeared in 1622, <hi rend='italic'>The Duke</hi> in
1623.</note> Massinger has many villains, but Shakspere
manages better with Richard III and Iago. Think again
of the uxoriousness of Ladislas, Theodosius, Domitian,
which some have held to be a covert satire on Charles I.
We despise these weak and servile husbands.
</p>

<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>

<p>
Now, is there anything we can urge in Massinger's
justification? I think there is. We read his plays nowadays,
we do not see them acted. We are therefore apt
to forget how impressive and vigorous good acting is.
The display of passion on the stage with gesture, attitude,
frown, and scorn, would render more tolerable some of
these scenes which offend us in the study by their crudeness.
Such a part, for instance, as Leosthenes in <hi rend='italic'>The
Bondman</hi>, the jealous and yet guilty lover, has great
opportunities for the actor. It might even be urged that
Massinger wrote thus because he knew the capabilities
of the actors who were going to perform his plays.
</p>

<p>
The same consideration applies to a feature in Massinger
which will strike every reader. He sets himself
at times to represent growth, or, at any rate, change, of
character. Even Shakspere seldom tries to do this,<note place='foot'>Perhaps Macbeth and Lady Macbeth are the only instances.
Notice in <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> various rapid changes of
mind&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, III., 2, 336: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Surrey.</hi> <q>I forgive him</q>; V., 2,
172: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Gardiner.</hi> <q>With a true heart and brother love I do
it.</q> Henry V and Antony are other instances which will occur
to everyone. In the case of the former, at any rate, I for one
feel that Shakspere cuts the Gordian knot.</note>
and it was too hard a task for his pupil. His most
ambitious venture in this direction is in <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>.
In that play Mathias has a magic portrait, which shows
him whether his wife is faithful to him or not in his absence;
and the alternations of the mind in husband and wife
alike are drawn with considerable power. Luke in <hi rend='italic'>The
City Madam</hi> is perhaps the most skilfully drawn example
of a development of character. The hypocrite is quite
carried away by the riches to which he unexpectedly
succeeds.<note place='foot'>The soliloquy of Luke over his brother's wealth is one of
the most splendid efforts of eloquence in English. (<hi rend='italic'>City
Madam</hi>, III., 3.)</note> Another successful conversion is that of
Theophilus at the end of <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>. It is due
partly to his eating the heavenly fruit, for which he had
asked Dorothea at her death, partly to the effect which the
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
grace and beauty of Angelo produce on his mind. The
gradual growth of his new belief, in spite of all that
Harpax can do, is managed with much skill, and it is in
itself true to nature that the man who had been violent
in one direction should ultimately be violent in another.
Moreover, we are bound to remember that when people
are soon persuaded, the play gets on. Indeed, I think
we have in this consideration the clue to the whole matter;
<q>the Stage Poet</q> had a practical mind.
</p>

<p>
Change of mood and vacillation of purpose, under the
stress of temptation, or due to the conflict of contrary
impulses, are features of some of Massinger's best scenes.
The wavering of the love-sick Caldoro while Durazzo is
abusing him is very true to life.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I.</note> The skill with which
the <q>melancholy</q> Vitelli's changes of mood are depicted
in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi><note place='foot'>I., 1.</note> suggests the theory that Massinger is
drawing his own portrait. The alternation of pride and
humility in Honoria in <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi><note place='foot'>I., 2.</note> is forcibly shown.
The just anger of Sophia at the end of the same play
yields skilfully to a combined intercession.
</p>

<p>
As a rule, however, the changes are too rapid. Thus, in
<hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi>, Aurelia, when she hears that Camiola
has ransomed Bertoldo and bound him with a promise to
marry her, suddenly changes her mind; she has been on
the point of marrying the faithless soldier, but, as she
says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 32'>On the sudden</l>
<l>I feel all fires of love quench'd in the water</l>
<l>Of my compassion.<note place='foot'>V., 2, 129.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Though the change is natural, it is inartistically effected;
it comes too suddenly. Think, however, what an opportunity
this would be for a great actress. If we were in
the audience, we should see the gradual development
reflected in her expression and bearing long before she
utters the words which embody her thought.
</p>

<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>

<p>
Other instances of the same thing are to be found in
Donusa's conversion to Christianity in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>,<note place='foot'><p>IV., 3, 133:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Vitelli.</hi> Your intent to win me<lb/>
To be of your belief, proceeded from<lb/>
Your fear to die. Can there be strength in that<lb/>
Religion, that suffers us to tremble<lb/>
At that which every day, nay hour, we haste to?
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Donusa.</hi> This is unanswerable, and there's something tells me<lb/>
I err in my opinion.
</p></note>
in the change of faith effected in Calista and Christeta by
Dorothea's story of the King of Egypt and Osiris' image,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, III., 1, 186.</note>
and in the indecision of Lorenzo about matrimony in <hi rend='italic'>The
Bashful Lover</hi>.<note place='foot'><p>IV., V. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> especially IV., 1, 138:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lorenzo.</hi> Stay, I feel<lb/>
A sudden alteration.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Martino.</hi> Here are fine whimsies.
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
Change of mind is an ungrateful and inartistic experience.
It has landed many honest politicians in bitter
and undeserved reproaches. From Aristotle's time onwards
Euripides has been blamed for his Iphigenia at
Aulis, who first feared to die, and then offered herself
for her country.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Poetics</hi>, 1454<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, 33.</note> We certainly feel that in Massinger
there are occasionally instances of cheap repentance
which do not seem real. Take the case of Corisca in <hi rend='italic'>The
Bondman</hi>; a bad woman repents, but though convinced
we are not pleased at the spectacle.<note place='foot'>III., 3; V., 3, 33. After all, Corisca does not repent of
her worst faults, only of her luxury and cruelty to her slaves.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also The Projector in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>, I., 2, 257.
On the other hand, the conversion of the courtiers in the same
play (II., 1, 154) is according to character.</note> If Massinger had
ever read the <hi rend='italic'>Poetics</hi> of Aristotle, he forgot or ignored the
precept that a character should be ὁμαλόν, or <q>consistent.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Poetics</hi>, 1454<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, 26.</note>
If this is not the case there is a danger that
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
the effect will be μιαρόν, or <q>odious,</q> to use a word
of which Aristotle is fond. I think, then, that this charge
is proven. Massinger saw how effective on the stage a
sudden change of character might be, but lacked the necessary
art to make it convincing. Hence some of his characters
are not even ὁμαλῶς ἀνώμαλοι.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Poetics</hi>, 1454<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, 28.</note> Perhaps the
explanation is this, that, being a master of language,
he overvalued the persuasiveness of rhetoric.<note place='foot'>Leslie Stephen has anticipated me here. <q>The truth
seems to be that Massinger is subject to an illusion natural
enough to a man who is more of the rhetorician than the seer.
He fancies that eloquence must be irresistible. He takes the
change of mood produced by an elevated appeal to the feelings
for a change of character</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hours in a Library</hi>, ii., p. 164).</note> It is not
enough to portray the varying emotions which sway the
mind at a particular moment; to produce a satisfactory
whole they have to be fused together. The reader should
not feel that the characters are at the mercy of the situations
in which they are placed, or they will appear to be
lay-figures or puppets, rather than live flesh and blood.
</p>

<p>
Yet even here a defence of some sort can be set up for
our poet. I will endeavour to make my meaning clear by
an analogy from music. It may have occurred to someone
to ask what the music of Mozart would have been
like if he had lived after Beethoven. Would it have been
more serious and sublime than it is? The question is
worth asking, even if the only answer to it be this, that
without Mozart Beethoven would never have existed.
I think it is fair to argue that Massinger, in his constant
effort after the representation of change of character,
was before his time; he was seeking after a complex but
possible effect, which the novelist can undertake but which
the limitations of the stage render almost impossible.<note place='foot'>Here again I find myself in agreement with Leslie Stephen.
<q>Massinger's plays are a gradual unravelling of a series of
incidents, each following intelligibly from the preceding situation,
and suggestive of many eloquent observations, though not
developments of one master thought. We often feel, that if
external circumstances had been propitious, he would have
expressed himself more naturally, in the form of a prose
romance than in a drama</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>, ii., p. 157). <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Coleridge's
remark that Massinger's plays are <q>as interesting as
novels.</q> How much character-drawing is there in Boccaccio
or Paynter?</note>
</p>

<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>

<p>
Is it fanciful to say that if he had lived in the eighteenth
century, if he had had before his eyes the work of Fielding,
Richardson, and Smollett, he would have been a good
novelist, less cynical than Fielding, more concise than
Richardson, more ideal than Smollett? There are authors
like Euripides and Virgil whose very failures by a strange
paradox seem part of their greatness; and we may perhaps
say that Massinger, by pointing the way somewhat tentatively
and blindly to subtle psychological studies, has
helped to build up the noble fabric of the English novel.
</p>

<p>
Let us now turn to some miscellaneous points of interest
in Massinger; and first, let us note his imitation of Shakspere.
It is tempting to suppose that as he was at one
time a dependent of a family which was intimate with
Shakspere he may have come across the man himself;<note place='foot'>Mr. Nichol Smith (<hi rend='italic'>Shakspere's England</hi>, ii., p. 202) doubts
the <q>association of Pembroke with Shakspere.</q></note>
it is, at any rate, simpler to remember that as he was
thirty-two years of age when Shakspere died, he can
hardly have failed to meet him in his professional relations.
But we have no evidence of the fact. All we can say is
that his plays, like those of Fletcher, Webster, Tourneur,
and others,<note place='foot'>Sir Sidney Lee (<hi rend='italic'>Life of W. Shakespeare</hi>, 1915, p. 441) notes
<q>the almost magical success</q> with which Massinger echoes
Shakspere's tones.</note> show a constant study of Shakspere.<note place='foot'>In a <q>mock</q> romance published at London in 1656,
<hi rend='italic'>Wit and Fancy in a Maze</hi> (Book 2, chapter iv.), the Enchantress
Lamia and the hero Don Zara del Fogo go to Elysium and
find everything in an uproar. Ajax and Ulysses are quarrelling;
Homer and Hesiod; Statius and Virgil. Last of all Ben
Jonson <q>had openly vaunted himself the first and best of
English poets.</q> This is much resented by Chaucer, Chapman,
and Spenser; last of all Shakspere and Fletcher appear <q>with
a strong party</q> to claim the first place. Among <q>their life
guard</q> are mentioned Goffe, Massinger, Dekker, Webster,
Suckling, Cartwright, Carew. Did Ben Jonson dislike
Massinger as Mr. Phelan conjectures?</note>
</p>

<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>

<p>
First let me give a few examples of the imitation of
incidents. In <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>,<note place='foot'>II., 1, 100.</note> Paris refers to a tragedy
<q>in which a murder was acted to the life,</q> which forced
a guilty hearer to make discovery of his secret; this
recalls the play scene in Hamlet.<note place='foot'>IV., 2.</note> In <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi><note place='foot'>IV., 3.</note>
Almira makes Antonio tell her his history. The hint of
this is taken from <hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>.<note place='foot'>I., 3.</note> In <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi><note place='foot'>III., 1, 261.</note> Beaumelle
and her maid arrange to be overheard, like Hero
and Ursula in <hi rend='italic'>Much Ado about Nothing</hi>.<note place='foot'>III., 1.</note> The device
by which Beaupré recovers her husband in <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament
of Love</hi> is imitated from <hi rend='italic'>All's Well that Ends Well</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Measure for Measure</hi>. The banditti in <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi><note place='foot'>II., 4. The good brigand goes back beyond Robin Hood
to Herodotus, VI. 16.</note>
respect the poor like the outlaws in <hi rend='italic'>The Two Gentlemen
of Verona</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV., 1.</note> The forest scenes in the same play recall
<hi rend='italic'>As You Like It</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Midsummer-Night's Dream</hi>.<note place='foot'>Compare especially V., 2, 104 with <hi rend='italic'>Midsummer Night's
Dream</hi>, II., 2, 145.</note> In
<hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi><note place='foot'>II., 1, 22.</note> the pretty tale of a sister which Ascanio
tells is a reminiscence of <hi rend='italic'>Twelfth Night</hi>.<note place='foot'>II., 4.</note> The incident
in the same play of Hortensio with Ascanio in his arms<note place='foot'>III., 1, 24.</note>
is modelled on <hi rend='italic'>As You Like It</hi>.<note place='foot'>II., 7.</note> Malefort's behaviour to
the tailor<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, III., 2, 13.</note> is imitated from Petruchio's in <hi rend='italic'>The Taming of
the Shrew</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV., 3.</note> The gibberish of the pretended Indians in
<hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi><note place='foot'>III., 3, 91-2.</note> reminds us of Parolles' adventure in
<hi rend='italic'>All's Well</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV., 1.</note> The scene in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi><note place='foot'>IV., 5.</note>
where Eudocia professes to have eaten the apple is
modelled on <hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi><note place='foot'>III., 4.</note>, where Desdemona asserts that the
handkerchief is not lost. In <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi><note place='foot'>II., 2, 93.</note> Zanthia
overhears Corisca's confession of love in her sleep, as Iago
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
does Cassio's.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, III., 3.</note> In <hi rend='italic'>A New Way to pay Old Debts</hi><note place='foot'>V., 1, 376. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Security in prison in <hi rend='italic'>Eastward Ho</hi>
(Act V.); Grimaldi in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi> (IV., 1, 4).</note> Sir
Giles Overreach, is carried off for treatment to a dark room
like Malvolio in <hi rend='italic'>Twelfth Night</hi>.<note place='foot'><p>III., 4, 148. On the other hand, Paulo in <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>
(III., 3, 5) observes:
</p>
<p>
To choke up his spirits in a dark room,<lb/>
Is far more dangerous.
</p></note> Almira in <hi rend='italic'>A Very
Woman</hi><note place='foot'>II., 3.</note> reminds us of the sleep-walking scene in <hi rend='italic'>Macbeth</hi>.
The ghosts in <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi><note place='foot'>V., 2.</note> and <hi rend='italic'>The Roman
Actor</hi><note place='foot'>V., 1.</note> are used like those in the finale of <hi rend='italic'>Richard III</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Parallels in thought and diction are also numerous.
Take <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi><note place='foot'>I., 3, 49. Rowley uses the metaphor in the dedication
of <hi rend='italic'>A Fair Quarrel</hi>.</note>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Aretinus.</hi> Are you on the stage,</l>
<l>You talk so boldly?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Paris.</hi> The whole world being one,</l>
<l>This place is not exempted.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This goes back to Jaques in <hi rend='italic'>As You Like It</hi>.<note place='foot'>II., 7.</note> In <hi rend='italic'>The
Maid of Honour</hi><note place='foot'>III., 1, 49.</note> Jacomo talks of <q>trailing the puissant
pike;</q> the phrase of Pistol in <hi rend='italic'>Henry V</hi>.<note place='foot'><p>IV., 1. The language of Ding'em in <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>
(IV.; 1, 15) takes us back to Pistol:
</p>
<p>
Thy word's a law,<lb/>
And I obey. Live, scrape-shoe, and be thankful,<lb/>
Thou man of muck and money, for as such<lb/>
I now salute thee; the suburbian gamesters<lb/>
Have heard thy fortunes, and I am, in person,<lb/>
Sent to congratulate.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, I., 2, 59:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Furnace.</hi> <q>I am appeased, and Furnace now grows cool.</q>
</p></note> In <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor
of the East</hi><note place='foot'><p>I., 2, 318. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Prophetess</hi>, I., 2, 31:
</p>
<p>
I presently, inspired with holy fire,<lb/>
And my prophetic spirit burning in me,<lb/>
Gave answer from the gods.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Double Marriage</hi>, II., 4, 30:
</p>
<p>
Who stole her? Oh! my prophetic soul!
</p></note> Athenais makes use of the phrase <q>prophetic
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
soul,</q> which we remember in <hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>.<note place='foot'>I., 5, 40.</note> Leosthenes uses
the same phrase in <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi><note place='foot'>IV., 2, 39.</note> when the mutinous slave
Cimbrio boasts of the excesses of his friends. The pun
which Hircius makes on the cobbler's awl<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, III., 3, 46.</note> occurs in the
first scene of <hi rend='italic'>Julius Cæsar</hi>. The madness of the English
slave in <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi><note place='foot'>III., 1, 118.</note> comes from the grave-diggers'
scene in <hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>.<note place='foot'>V., 1, 170.</note> The <q>many-headed monster, multitude</q>
of Theodosius in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi><note place='foot'>II., 1, 99. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, III., 2, 35.</note> takes us
back to Coriolanus' <q>beast with many heads</q>;<note place='foot'>IV., 1, 1.</note> while the
reference in the same play<note place='foot'>III., 2, 18.</note> to the <q>stomach</q> reminds us
of the fable of Menenius.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Coriolanus</hi>, I., 1, 99.</note> In <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi><note place='foot'><p>I., 2, 40.  <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, I., 3, 88, and <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of
the East</hi>, V., 2, 83:
</p>
<p>
I am flesh and blood, as you are, sensible<lb/>
Of heat and cold, as much a slave unto<lb/>
The tyranny of my passions as the meanest<lb/>
Of my poor subjects.
</p></note> Uberti
discourses thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I look on your dimensions, and find not</l>
<l>Mine own of lesser size; the blood that fills</l>
<l>My veins, as hot as yours, my sword as sharp,</l>
<l>My nerves of equal strength, my heart as good.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
This reminds us of Shylock in <hi rend='italic'>The Merchant of Venice</hi><note place='foot'>III., 1.</note>
and the King in <hi rend='italic'>Henry V</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV., 1, 103.</note> Clarindore's language in
<hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi><note place='foot'>II., 1, 54.</note> is modelled on Malvolio in <hi rend='italic'>Twelfth
Night</hi>.<note place='foot'>II., 5.</note> The same is true of Sir Giles Overreach in <hi rend='italic'>A New
Way</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV., 3, 131-137.</note> Shakspere's dislike of spaniels reappears in the
same play.<note place='foot'>II., 1, 38. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Bradley, <hi rend='italic'>Shakspearean Tragedy</hi>, p. 268.</note>
</p>

<p>
No doubt we must make deductions for the common
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
idioms of the day,<note place='foot'>Thus, to take an instance at random, the madness of
the Englishman is referred to in Webster's <hi rend='italic'>Malcontent</hi> (III. 1).</note> but the cumulative evidence of these
parallels with the elder dramatist is overwhelming.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <ref target='Appendix_IV'>Appendix IV</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Massinger is very fond of introducing doctors in his
plays; so no doubt are the other dramatists of this period.
It is interesting to compare Paulo in <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi> with
Corax in <hi rend='italic'>The Lover's Melancholy</hi> of Ford, who deals successfully
with two cases of mental derangement. Ford
is more subtle, Massinger more dignified. Thus we find
in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi><note place='foot'>IV., 1.</note> a consultation about Antoninus'
health. Sapritius, the afflicted father, hails the doctors
thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O you that are half gods, lengthen that life</l>
<l>Their deities lend us; turn o'er all the volumes</l>
<l>Of your mysterious Æsculapian science</l>
<l>T' increase the number of this young man's days.<note place='foot'>IV., 1, 1. The last line shows how prosaic Massinger
could on occasion be. In judging our older writers, however,
it is important to remember that words change their poetical
value with time; it is clear, for example, that in James I.'s
age, <q>undertaker,</q> <q>proceedings,</q> <q>punctually,</q> <q>aunt,</q>
were regarded as legitimate in poetry.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Compare with this another passage in <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Sforza.</hi>        O you earthly gods,</l>
<l>You second natures, that from your great master,</l>
<l>Who join'd the limbs of torn Hippolytus,</l>
<l>And drew upon himself the Thunderer's envy,</l>
<l>Are taught those hidden secrets that restore</l>
<l>To life death-wounded men!<note place='foot'>V., 2, 49-54.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi><note place='foot'>II., 2, 23.</note> Paulo, on entering with two surgeons,
is thus addressed:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Duke.</hi> My hand! You rather</l>
<l>Deserve my knee, and it shall bend as to</l>
<l>A second father, if your saving aids</l>
<l>Restore my son.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Viceroy.</hi> Rise, thou bright star of knowledge,</l>
<l>Thou honour of thy art, thou help of nature.</l>
<l>Thou glory of our academies!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The old saying, <q>Ubi tres medici ibi duo athei,</q> referred
to by Sir T. Browne in <hi rend='italic'>Religio Medici</hi> is recalled to us by
these lines:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Viceroy.</hi> Observe his piety; I have heard, how true</l>
<l>I know not, most physicians, as they grow</l>
<l>Greater in skill, grow less in their religion;</l>
<l>Attributing so much to natural causes,</l>
<l>That they have little faith in that they cannot</l>
<l>Deliver reason for; this doctor steers</l>
<l>Another course.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, II., 2, 96.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
We find them again in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>,<note place='foot'>IV., 4.</note> where
a surgeon is contrasted with an empiric who vends his
wares and talks much Latin, like the quack in Ben Jonson's
<hi rend='italic'>Alchemist</hi>, while Paulinus complains of the many medical
impostors who prey upon the rich. The crisis of <hi rend='italic'>The Duke
of Milan</hi><note place='foot'>V., 2.</note> owes much to the action of doctors. The plot
of <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi> hinges largely on the skill of the doctor
Paulo, to whom we have referred above. In this play
we have two victims of melancholy, Almira and Cardenes;
the former is cured by falling in love with the disguised
John Antonio; the latter is Paulo's patient. The recovery
of the avaricious father in <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi><note place='foot'>II., 1.</note> is due to Paris
acting in the part of a doctor. The physician Dinant in
<hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi> gives the gallants a good lesson
(IV., 5). And in <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi><note place='foot'>II., 2, 84-98; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, II., 2, 2; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>,
I., 3, 216; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, III., 2, 54; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, III., 1,
23; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, I., 4, 23; <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, V., 1, 69;
<hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, IV., 1, 131 and 231.</note> we find an elaborate
simile, in which soldiers are said to be the surgeons of
the State. In the same play Hilario,<note place='foot'>III., 1, 12-16.</note> when on starvation
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
fare, is accosted by a surgeon, who invites him to sell himself
for <q>a living anatomy to be set up in the surgeons'
hall.</q> Such passages,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, II., 2, 36; IV., 4, 22; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>,
V., 1, 72-156; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, IV., 3, 39; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>,
IV., 3, 97; <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, IV., 1, 199; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>,
V., 1, 526-7; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I., 1, 13; II., 5, 56; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, III., 4, 21.</note> and the zest with which Massinger
refers to potatoes, eringos, and the like,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, II., 2, 17-22; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, IV., 2, 26-33.</note> together
with the rather wearisome allusions which he makes to
<q>caudles</q> and <q>cullises,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 2, 30; IV., 2, 79; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I., 2, 36; IV., 2, 44;
IV., 4, 21; <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, II., 2, 20; IV., 2, 99; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the
East</hi>, I., 2, 223; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, IV., 1, 49; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I., 1,
297.</note> lead us to wonder whether
at one time of his life he may have seriously studied
medicine. There is a significant passage in <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament
of Love</hi>,<note place='foot'>III., 1, 26; III., 1, 32.</note> where Chamont says to the doctor Dinant,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Good master doctor, when your leisure serves,</l>
<l>Visit my house; when we least need their art,</l>
<l>Physicians look most lovely.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
And close intercourse with doctors may have suggested
the lines immediately below:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Novall.</hi> The knave is jealous.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Perigot.</hi> 'Tis a disease few doctors cure themselves of.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
At the same time, let us not forget the passages where
he shows a knowledge of the law;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note> nor the fact that books
have been written to prove that Shakspere must have had
a training in this or that profession.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Churton Collins' <hi rend='italic'>Studies in Shakspere: No. V.</hi>, <q>Was
Shakspere a lawyer?</q> Mr. Arthur Underhill, in <hi rend='italic'>Shakspere's
England</hi>, Vol. i, No. xiii., decides that Shakspere's <q>knowledge
of law was neither profound nor accurate.</q></note> The really interesting
point about the doctors in Massinger is that they are
so often praised as the healers of the mind; the dramatist
who delights in drawing gloomy, passionate characters
seems to have a high opinion for the profession which
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
undertook to cure <q>melancholy.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, II., 2, 60-64. It is to be noted that doctors
are common also in Fletcher, the reason being that there are
so many duels, and unexpected recoveries, in that author.
Thus, the surgeon diets the Duke of Sesse in <hi rend='italic'>The Double
Marriage</hi> (II., 4); and in the same play the doctor plays tricks
on Castruccio's food (V., 1). In <hi rend='italic'>The Sea Voyage</hi> (III., 1) the
surgeon is introduced merely to make fun of his apparatus.
Doctors, chirurgeons, and apothecaries appear in fifteen of the
plays of Beaumont and Fletcher. The same remark applies
to Webster; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Duchess of Malfi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The White Devil</hi>, and
especially <hi rend='italic'>The Devil's Law-case</hi>.</note> In <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>
he takes care to praise and reward the doctor more highly
than the surgeons. On the other hand, like most of his
contemporaries, he naturally makes the physician a part
of the machinery rather than an individual character.
Even the doctor in <hi rend='italic'>A Fair Quarrel</hi>, who takes an unusually
large part in the plot, can hardly be said to be
more than a carefully drawn lay figure. The same remark
applies to the friars of Shakspere.
</p>

<p>
The chief question about Massinger which interests
the student of English is the authorship of <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>.
Did he take part in writing that play with Fletcher?
There is a great mass of literature on this subject. As one
who has read the undoubted plays of Massinger many
times, I am bound to say that while there is much in the
play which reminds one of Shakspere and Fletcher, I
find little trace of Massinger's style. I do not deny that
there are one or two slight reminiscences; thus the word
<q>file</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>, I., 1, 75; I., 2, 42; III., 2, 171.</note> is a favourite one with Massinger. We find
blushing in the play once or twice,<note place='foot'>II., 3, 42 and 72; III., 2, 305, 307, 353.</note> but then we find it
elsewhere in Shakspere. Anne's remark to the old lady,
<q>Come, you are pleasant,</q><note place='foot'>II., 3, 93.</note> is in Massinger's manner,
but he may have taken the turn from Shakspere. The
strict metre of such a line as this is like Massinger;<note place='foot'>III., 2, 37; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> III., 4, 69.  Beaumont observes a similar
strictness.</note>
the same remark applies again:
</p>

<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Surrey.</hi> Has the King this?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Suffolk.</hi>            Believe it.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Surrey.</hi>                    Will this work?</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The fourth scene of the second act is a great law-court
Scene, and Massinger has several such, in which
he may be copying Shakspere. The combination of
courtiers in dialogue which we get in various parts of
<hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> is like Massinger;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, I., 1; III., 2.</note> but, to my mind, the
scenes are more clumsy than their parallels in Massinger.
Sudden changes of mind are found in <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, III., 2, 336; IV., 2, 73; V., 4, 172.</note>
and this is probably the strongest bit of evidence in favour
of Massinger's authorship. The characters are not harmoniously
rounded off: Buckingham's prayers for the
King<note place='foot'>II., 1, 88-94.</note> do not please us; the King's scruples of conscience
are not convincing;<note place='foot'>II., 2, 143.</note> Wolsey's meekness<note place='foot'>III., 2, 297-8.</note> and piety<note place='foot'>III., 2, 365.</note> do
not ring true, though they anticipate the picture of his
last year which we get in Cavendish's Life&mdash;but all these
blemishes may be due to hasty work or dual authorship.
Failure in representing vacillation and complexity of
character is, as we have seen above, a note of Massinger,
but the failures of this kind in <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> are marked by
a sentimentality which reminds us of Fletcher.
</p>

<p>
Let us see now what there is in the play unlike Massinger.
To begin with, there are many passages in Shakspere's
difficult later style,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, I., 1, 39-44; II., 3, 13-16, 18-22, 32; II., 4, 70-73,
78, 79, 129, 130; IV., 1, 56-59; V., 1, 2-5, 11-16, 36; V., 3, 1012,
20-31, 43-45.</note> and there is a complete absence
of Massinger's sinuous sentences and frequent parentheses,
as also of his peculiar vocabulary; there are many flights
of high and tender poetry which are beyond his compass;
there are brilliant γνῶμαι, such as&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Griffith.</hi> Noble madam,</l>
<l>Men's evil manners live in brass, their virtues</l>
<l>We write in water,<note place='foot'>IV., 2, 45.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>

<p>
or,
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Chancellor.</hi> But we are all men,</l>
<l>In our own natures frail, and capable</l>
<l>Of our flesh; few are angels,<note place='foot'>V., 3, 10.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
which are quite out of his range of power.
</p>

<p>
Again, there is a curious series of links in the play,
by which characters who are to come on later are introduced;
it seems to be an attempt to give unity to a disconnected
work. Thus, the King's belief in Cranmer
is early indicated;<note place='foot'>II., 4, 238.</note> Cromwell's future success is foreshadowed
by Wolsey;<note place='foot'>III., 2, 447.</note> Gardiner's dislike of Cranmer is
brought before us.<note place='foot'>IV., 1, 103.</note> This is a method of which I can recall
no instance in Massinger's undoubted plays.
</p>

<p>
In spite of his roughness and ferocity, Henry is more of a
man than any of Massinger's tyrants; there is no parallel
in Massinger to Anne Boleyn, slight as her portrait is;
while Katherine and Wolsey are alike far superior to
anything of his. Lastly, the pageantry and processions
of the play do not appear in Massinger's simple designs.
</p>

<p>
The authors of <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> were essaying an impossible
task. They were trying to construct an historical play
out of materials which were too various to make artistic
unity feasible, and they had to make an unattractive
character the centre of the piece. Consequently, they
decided to end the play at the christening of Elizabeth,
and to cover their retreat with gorgeous rhetoric about the
Virgin Queen<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> II., 3, 77; III., 2, 50&mdash;both instances of the method of
anticipation referred to above.</note> and her Stuart successor. It would have
been quite impossible to introduce the death of Anne
Boleyn, or any further incident of the reign, without
harrowing the feelings of the spectator and losing all
sense of proportion. But they do make a desperate
effort to centre our attention on the King as a commanding
figure; he comes before us as <q>the first gentleman in
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
Europe,</q> and as the anxious lover of his people; he is
represented as torn by conflicting emotions about the
divorce, and as badly treated by Rome; all we can say is,
these facts are true, however unskilfully the play brings
them before us. Whatever the King does, we are meant
to like him. His victims all conspire to invoke the blessings
of Heaven on his head; Buckingham,<note place='foot'>II., 1, 88.</note> Wolsey,<note place='foot'>III., 2, 393.</note>
Katherine,<note place='foot'>IV., 2, 125.</note> all agree in this, reminding us of John Stubbs
the Puritan, who, when his right hand was cut off for
writing a book against Elizabeth's proposed marriage,
put off his hat with his left, and said with a loud voice,
<q>God save the Queen.</q> The christening scene in Act V.
is skilfully constructed so as to concentrate our interest
on Henry; we feel that he is a royal and heroic figure,
whose faults may in the last resort be palliated by the
consideration that he is the father of Elizabeth.
</p>

<p>
I agree with the critics who regard the play as a failure
from the artistic point of view; it lacks unity, and it
moves awkwardly. It might even be called a spectacular
experiment. But I rate it higher than they seem to do;
its faults are largely due to the subject; it has much of
Shakspere in it, as for example, the conscientious way in
which the historical details are introduced.<note place='foot'><p>Thus Gardiner's dislike of Anne Boleyn (V., 1, 22) is true
to history, though artistically a blemish on the play, because
redundant.
</p>
<p>
The way in which in IV., 1, and elsewhere, historical details
are dragged in is quite unlike Massinger, and very like Shakspere.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> lines 17-19, 24-29, 38-42, 47-49, 51, 52, 101-103.</p></note> It is full of
superb and moving passages, and it uses the eleven-syllable
line with skill and tenderness. If some of its
defects remind us faintly of Massinger, its excellences
are altogether beyond his abilities. Doubtless, it is
natural to wish that each play of Shakspere should excel
its predecessor, and to be unwilling to confess that he
ended his career with something that was not supremely
excellent. In the same way we may be sorry that one
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
of Mozart's last works, <hi rend='italic'>Titus</hi>, was a failure. But it is
better to take things as we find them than to seek to
twist them into something else on inadequate grounds.
</p>

<p>
Boyle's attribution of <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> to Fletcher and Massinger<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>New Shakspere Society's Transactions</hi>, 1880-86, xxi.</note>
was coldly received by the New Shakspere Society.<note place='foot'>See Discussion on January 16th, 1885.</note>
Let us look at his arguments. I trust that condensation
will do them no injustice.
</p>

<p>
1. There is a change in the conception of the character
of Buckingham. Such changes constantly occur in the
plays which Fletcher and Massinger wrote together, notably
in the character of Sir John Van Olden Barnavelt. Therefore
Massinger wrote part of <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>. This line of
argument, even if valid, would only prove collaboration
by Fletcher with someone else.
</p>

<p>
2. The Shakspere play <hi rend='italic'>All is True</hi> may have
perished in the <q>Globe</q> fire of 1613. <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> was
written to take its place, but not produced before 1616.
The evidence quoted for the date 1616-17 is very weak,
and does nothing to prove Massinger's co-operation.
</p>

<p>
3. If it be urged that the reputed authors of the play
were alive in 1623, when it was published as Shakspere's
work in the Folio, Boyle replies,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, p. 447.</note> <q>that, with the exception
perhaps of Ben Jonson, it would never have occurred
to a dramatist of that age to claim as his property what
was published under another's name.</q> This is a bold
statement. Can an instance of such indifference be
quoted? Or are we merely bidden to remember that
Massinger was poor?
</p>

<p>
4. Boyle then works through the scenes which he
ascribes to Massinger.
</p>

<p>
I., 1.&mdash;The opening is like <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>,
III., 1. <q>An untimely ague</q> corresponds to <q>a sudden
fever.</q> The resemblance of the scenes is undoubted, and
the parallel phrases are remarkable. Note, however,
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
that the writer says the same thing twice (lines 4 and 13),
while lines 9-12 are not like Massinger.
</p>

<p>
I., 4.&mdash;Lines 1-18, and 60 to the end. I find no trace
of Massinger's style in these passages. He never wrote
lines 75-6:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The fairest hand I ever touch'd! O beauty,</l>
<l>Till now I never knew thee!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
or such a phrase as <q>let the music knock it</q> <foreign rend='italic'>ad finem</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
II., 1.&mdash;Lines 1-54, and 136 to the end. I find no trace
of Massinger's style in these passages. Boyle has to
allow that Fletcher altered several lines in 1-54; this is
precarious and subjective reasoning.
</p>

<p>
II., 3.&mdash;Lines 1-11 are in the parenthetic manner, but
quite unlike Massinger's. <q>Soft cheveril conscience</q> in
line 31, and <q>you'd venture an emballing</q> in line 47,
are instances of the strong vocabulary which marks the
play.<note place='foot'>For other instances see II., 4, 208; III., 2, 39-42, 55-56,
96, 159; V., 1, 22-3, 36, 109-11; V., 3, 43-45.</note> Picturesque phrases of this kind are not characteristic
of Massinger's style.
</p>

<p>
Nor did Massinger ever sink so low as line 64:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>A thousand pound a year, annual support.<note place='foot'>The same remark applies to V., 3, 8.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
II., 4.&mdash;No doubt Massinger loves a forensic scene, but
this one leads to nothing and leaves the mind in confusion.
Now, Massinger was too good an artist to do that. The
things the people say in this scene must have passed through
their minds in real life, but they are combined in such
a way as to be true to history rather than to dramatic
propriety. The author aims at telling what happened,
and what happened does not always make a good play.
It might even be urged from what we know of Massinger
that he was too good a <q>stage-poet</q> to undertake an
English historical play with its necessary limitations.
</p>

<p>
III., 2, 1-203.&mdash;The scene, like so much else in the play,
lacks the refinement and courtliness which Massinger
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
always has at his command. It may be noted that the
bluff, coarse atmosphere of the <q>Shaksperian</q> scenes
is very suitable to the central figure of the play.<note place='foot'>Compare such a line as V., 3, 94.</note> Henry
VIII infects his surroundings with himself, and this might
be quoted as an indication of Shaksperian skill.
</p>

<p>
IV., 1.&mdash;The prosaic details of this scene are unlike
anything in Massinger.<note place='foot'>See p. 87, n. 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
V., 1.&mdash;The point of this scene is to concentrate our
attention on Elizabeth's birth. The scene <q>sprawls</q>
sadly, to use Boyle's description of Fletcher's method.
First we have Gardiner and Lovell, then Henry and
Suffolk, then Henry and Cranmer, then Henry and the
old lady. Massinger constructed better than this.
</p>

<p>
V., 3, 1-113.&mdash;Such a speech as Cranmer makes (lines
58-69) is too short for Massinger's ample method, and its
terse, broken style is singularly unlike his.
</p>

<p>
5. The few parallels of diction which Boyle brings
forward are either from plays which are not certainly by
Massinger, or may be explained as due to reminiscence
or common phraseology.
</p>

<p>
6. Boyle has much of value to say in his criticisms of
the characters. But again and again he seems to forget
that the author is hampered by the story. He could not
treat Henry VIII as Schiller treated Mary Stuart; to
idealize the events would have been an act of <foreign rend='italic'>lèse-majesté</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
It is true that Anne Boleyn is not a creation of the same
order as Shakspere's later heroines&mdash;Imogen, Miranda,
Marina, Perdita. Though beautiful and charming, she is
shallow and commonplace. Is not this, however, the
Anne Boleyn of real life?
</p>

<p>
<q>Katherine is inferior to Hermione in <hi rend='italic'>The Winter's
Tale</hi>.</q> But why should not her portrait be drawn on
different lines? Is she not a proud Spanish princess?
She is certainly one of the great figures of English
Tragedy.
</p>

<p>
Wolsey is meant to be great but is really vulgar, while
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
<q>his utter collapse after disgrace is unnatural.</q> The reply
is that Wolsey is a mixed character, and none the worse
dramatically for that; very able, very unscrupulous in his
use of the courtier's tricks, very fond of power; but not
wholly bad. His repentance is true at once to human
nature and to history.
</p>

<p>
<q>The king is unintelligible.</q> The fact is, it was impossible
to make a hero of Henry VIII; it does not, therefore,
follow that Massinger helped to write the play!
Boyle is correct when he says that it is with Henry as it is
with Wolsey: <q>we receive our impressions of the characters
from the opinions formed of them by others.</q>
In other words, the characterization of the play is faulty.
Some critics have supposed that this fact is due to loss
of mental power by Shakspere; it is simpler to hold the
collaboration with Fletcher as responsible for the jolts
and jars which the play gives the reader. If anyone still
holds that Shakspere wrote the whole play, he might
plausibly take the line that Shakspere was experimenting
in the new style and metre of his popular young rival
Fletcher. If, however, Shakspere in his retreat at Stratford,
in days when posts were infrequent and locomotion
slow, forwarded scenes and suggestions for Fletcher to
work up at his own sweet will, something like what we
have would be the result. Fletcher was evidently on his
mettle on this occasion. I cannot prove that Fletcher
did not invite Massinger to help him in such an enterprise,
and I know how fond Massinger was of studying
Shakspere. The latter argument, however, cuts both
ways. Again, Massinger may have had an earlier Shaksperian
style, very unlike his mature style; but this is
pure hypothesis. The evidence which we have does not
justify us in saying more than this, that he knew the play
of <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> well.<note place='foot'>For <q>catalogue lines,</q> <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> I., 2, 33; II., 1. 116; II., 3, 29;
III., 2, 342; V., 5, 48. For assonances, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> I., 3, 25, 27, 31,
35, 41; II., 1, 126; II., 2, 28, 48; II., 3, 86; II., 4, 92;
III., 2, 125, 129, 213, 214, 236, 255, 259; V., 2, 32; V., 3, 23,
60, 72, 103; V., 4, 94; V., 5, 30. For repetitions of words, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi>
III., 1, 110; III., 2, 29; V., 1, 98, 138. Passages which remind
us of Massinger are I., 4, 101; II., 3, 93; V., 1, 62, 70, and 71;
Epilogue, 5.</note>
</p>

<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>

<p>
It would take me too far from my purpose to discuss
the authorship of <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi> in detail, interesting
as the problem is, but as many critics have
assigned the <q>un-Fletcherian</q> parts of the play to
Massinger, I have, as in duty bound, read the play carefully
several times. There is very little trace of his style,
or method, or metre. The only passage which reads to
me like Massinger is assigned by Boyle to Fletcher.<note place='foot'>V., 1, 1-7.</note>
Mr. Dugdale Sykes, in an acute article,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Modern Language Review</hi>, April, 1916.</note> has produced some
parallels between Massinger and <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>;
but though one or two of them are striking, they do not
prove his case when they are looked at in connexion with
the context.
</p>

<p>
Take, for example:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>3rd Queen.</hi> He that will all the treasure know o' th' earth</l>
<l>Must know the centre too.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 124. My numeration in <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi> is
Mr. Tucker Brooke's.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Mr. Sykes compares these lines in <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of
Love</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cleremond.</hi> And I should gild my misery with false comforts,</l>
<l>If I compared it with an Indian slave's,</l>
<l>That with incessant labour to search out</l>
<l>Some unknown mine, dives almost to the centre.<note place='foot'>III., 2, 14.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On this passage I make two remarks: first, such similarity
of thought as is found here may be due to imitation
or unconscious reminiscence of <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>.
A man who constantly repeats himself is surely the sort of
person who would delight to borrow thoughts and phrases
from other writers, and to imitate whole scenes and incidents.
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
Are we to suppose that Massinger confined his
studies to Shakspere?
</p>

<p>
Secondly, let us judge the passage as a whole; it runs
thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>He that will all the treasure know o' th' earth</l>
<l>Must know the centre too; he that will fish</l>
<l>For my least minnow, let him lead his line</l>
<l>To catch one at my heart.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Anything more unlike Massinger than this fishing for
minnows cannot be imagined.
</p>

<p>
Take again the parallel,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi>, p. 143.</note> <q>which alone should be conclusive
of Massinger's authorship</q>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Pirithous.</hi> Though I know</l>
<l>His ocean needs not my poor drops, yet they</l>
<l>Must yield their tribute there. My precious maid,</l>
<l>Those best affections, that the heavens infuse</l>
<l>In their best temper'd pieces, keep enthroned</l>
<l>In your dear heart.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>, I., 3, 8.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi> we have:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'>Though I know</l>
<l>The ocean of your apprehensions needs not</l>
<l>The rivulet of my poor cautions, yet,</l>
<l>Bold from my long experience, I presume, etc.<note place='foot'>V., 1, 161.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Though the similarity of thought and expression in the
first three lines is manifest, the archaic simplicity of the
first passage differs greatly from the mature flow of the
second.
</p>

<p>
What is Mr. Sykes' theory? <q>If we admit Massinger's
collaboration in this play, at the very outset of
his literary career, before his style was definitely formed,
and when the influence of the foremost dramatist
of the age was strongest upon him, the apparently
<q>Shaksperian</q> quality of its verse can readily be explained.</q>
On this proposition I make two remarks;
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
first, that as we have none of Massinger's early works,
I cannot prove that he never wrote in the style of <hi rend='italic'>The
Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>; I can only assert with absolute
certainty that none of his extant works has the least
resemblance to it. Secondly, as to the supposed <q>Shaksperian</q>
colour of the play, this is a point on which one's
judgment varies each time one reads it. There is a great
deal in the <q>un-Fletcherian</q> parts which reminds one
of Shakspere; some of it is so like his later style that it is
not surprising to find that many great critics have assigned
it to him; many other passages, however, seem just not
to ring true; they are obscure because they have little
meaning. For let not the fact be disguised, in spite of one
great lyric, several splendid scenes, and some fine speeches,
there is much poor stuff in <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The simplest explanation of the double ascription in
the quarto of 1634 is to suppose that Shakspere helped
Fletcher in some way. He may even have written the un-Fletcherian
parts,<note place='foot'>II., 1 reads to me like Shakspere.</note> though, personally, I find traces of
Fletcher in them also; he may have left material which
Fletcher worked up; he may have merely suggested the
construction of the plot, a department in which Fletcher
is weak.
</p>

<p>
If, however, the <q>Shaksperian</q> parts be deemed
unworthy of Shakspere, why assign them to Massinger,
whose work they do not resemble? Could no one else
have imitated Shakspere except Massinger? Why should
not Fletcher himself for once have caught the Shaksperian
manner? Why should he not have confided the
execution of a part to someone else who was soaked in
Shakspere's style? Why should not Beaumont have
helped him here as elsewhere,<note place='foot'>A Danish scholar, Dr. Bierfreund, maintains this thesis
(Tucker Brooke, Introd., p. xlv).</note> or possibly Heywood?
</p>

<p>
The archaic flavour of the play is to me the outstanding
fact about it; we know that plays on this subject were acted
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
in 1566 and 1594. The archaic flavour may be due to the
influence of Chaucer on the writers; it is more likely to be
due to an earlier play having been taken and altered.
It might also be due to the collaboration of someone like
Heywood, who, though late in time, is surprisingly simple
and early in style. The rustic scenes are an instance of
this very early manner.<note place='foot'>II., 3; III., 5.</note> If Shakspere and Fletcher took
an old play, and the former contributed a few turns to
the revised edition, then everything would be accounted
for.<note place='foot'>This is perhaps what Mr. Bullen believes about the play.</note> It will be said that there are scenes which remind us
of Lady Macbeth and Ophelia; why should not an already
existing play have suggested to Shakspere something
which he worked up in those two characters into a far
finer result? We know for a fact that much of his best
work is based on older plays. This random hypothesis
is quite as probable as the supposition that Massinger
had anything to do with <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Let us next consider Mr. Tucker Brooke's position.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Shakespeare Apocrypha.</hi></note>
After a searching and masterly analysis of the merits
and defects of the play, he ends with a guarded tendency
towards assigning the <q>un-Fletcherian</q> parts to Massinger
on the following grounds: <q>The metrical tests
give him an even better title than his master [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Shakspere]
to the doubtful parts of our play.</q> To this I reply
that style is a more important test than metre. There are,
secondly, <q>the structural and psychological imperfections
of the work</q>; thirdly, <q>the tendency to unnecessary
coarseness of language</q>; fourthly, <q>the feeble imitation
of Shakspere</q>; fifthly, <q>the frequent similarity to Massinger's
acknowledged writings.</q> The only serious argument
against the assumption is that there is nothing in
Massinger to compare with <q>the magnificent poetry of
the un-Fletcherian part.</q>
</p>

<p>
Let us briefly look at these arguments. The work
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
is <q>structurally and psychologically imperfect.</q> True,
and this point might be quoted to support the theory that
the play is based on an old and immature tragedy. As far
as concerns structure, Massinger's plays are always strong;
so that part of the argument falls to the ground. No doubt
his psychology is his weak point, but its weakness is of a
different kind from that which we find in <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble
Kinsmen</hi>. There are no violent emotions of the sort in
which he rejoices in it. There are no characters in Massinger
resembling Palamon and Arcite. Mr. Brooke refers
to their <q>spinelessness,</q> and it is true that they are not
much differentiated. I suppose, however, that he would
allow that they start by being a romantic pair of friends,
that their quarrel when they first see Emilia is lifelike,
and that their subsequent behaviour is chivalrous. When
he refers to <q>the really revolting wishy-washiness and
ingrained sensuality of Emilia</q> he uses exaggerated
language. The fact is, that Emilia is in a very difficult
position, and if her character is ambiguous it is the fault
of the story rather than of the author.
</p>

<p>
<q>The tendency to unnecessary coarseness of language.</q>
This is based in the main on Hippolyta's language,<note place='foot'>I., 1, 209.</note>
with which Mr. Sykes compares a passage in <hi rend='italic'>The
Unnatural Combat</hi>.<note place='foot'>III., 1, 74.</note> I have discussed the supposed coarseness
of Massinger's heroines elsewhere. In spite of everything
that Boyle can say, with his catalogue of twenty-two
passages, I wonder who is right about Massinger's
women, Boyle or Courthope, who says that <q>his portraits
of women show more delicacy of feeling and imagination
than those of any English dramatist with the exception
of Shakspere.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>H. E. L.</hi>, iv., p. 361.</note> I, at any rate, feel that Courthope
is nearer the truth than Boyle and his followers.
</p>

<p>
<q>Feeble imitation of Shakspere.</q> That there is imitation
of Shakspere in Massinger we all know; but I deny that
it is feeble, and we know that others of the same age,
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
like Fletcher, Webster, and Tourneur, have delighted to
imitate him.
</p>

<p>
<q>The frequent similarity to Massinger's writings.</q>
In the first place, I do not feel that the similarity is frequent;
and secondly, as has already been pointed out,
what similarity there is may be due to imitation of <hi rend='italic'>The
Two Noble Kinsmen</hi> by Massinger. Are we to suppose
that the only author he imitated or borrowed from was
Shakspere?
</p>

<p>
The final reservation raises mixed feelings. I am tired
of those writers who grudgingly attribute to Massinger
the leavings of other playwrights, making him the whipping
boy of his age, and who proceed to qualify their
theories by doubts as to his ability to attain to the excellences
which they perforce discover in them. I will be
so far generous to Mr. Brooke as to allow that <q>the magnificent
poetry of the un-Fletcherian parts</q> is unlike Massinger,
because there is no reason for supposing that he
wrote any of these parts. Massinger's fame can stand
on its own merits without these churlishly conceded
ascriptions of doubtful work.
</p>

<p>
And now let us pass to Boyle's notable article on this
subject.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>New Shakspere Society's Transactions</hi>, 1880-5, pt. 2, xviii.</note> Much as I admire his learning and zeal, I am
amazed at the perversity of his judgment and the thinness
of his arguments. Let us take them in order.
<q>There is a want of development in the dramatic character</q><note place='foot'>Page 372.</note>
of <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>. This Boyle ascribes
to the fact that, as elsewhere, Massinger's conceptions were
blurred by Fletcher's co-operation in other parts of the
play. As this argument begs the question it has no weight.
<q>Allusions to Shakspere are characteristic both of Massinger
and <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>Page 373.</note> Are we to suppose
that no one imitated Shakspere except Massinger?
<q>The metrical structure of the play corresponds closely
with Massinger's general style.</q><note place='foot'>Pages 375-6.</note> Here, however, Boyle
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
has to allow that the percentages for double endings
are not what you would expect. And I look with suspicion
on a writer who professes to be so certain of these
tests that he can assign I., 1-40, and V., 1-19, to Fletcher.
<q>Massinger is fond of classical allusions, as is the author
of <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>Page 381.</note> This argument deserves
no consideration when we remember that the fact is true
of other Elizabethan writers. For example, we find <q>the
helmeted Bellona,</q><note place='foot'>I., 1, 76.</note> and Massinger is fond of the sonorous
word.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, I., 4, 41; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 2, 112; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>,
I., 1, 13. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Tamburlaine</hi>, pt. II., III., 2; <hi rend='italic'>Orlando Furioso</hi>,
V., 2.</note> Yes, but Bellona is not unknown in Shakspere.
M. Arnold has pointed out that she occurs in a weak passage
of Macbeth.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Macbeth</hi>, I., 1, 54.</note> <q>Medical and surgical similes occur
in both.</q><note place='foot'>Page 387.</note> When we come to investigate these we find
that the remarks in question are of a commonplace kind.
<q>The characters of <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi> resemble
those of Massinger.</q><note place='foot'>Page 393.</note> Theseus, for example, resembles
Lorenzo in <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>. I see no resemblance.
<q>Palamon and Arcite may be met with in many of Massinger's
plays.</q><note place='foot'>Page 393.</note> I fail to find them anywhere. <q>The
three ladies are grossly sensual in their remarks.</q><note place='foot'>Page 394.</note>
I have dealt with this point before, and it really amounts
to a mischievous obsession in Boyle's mind. Let us take
the passages seriatim; Emilia is talking privately to Hippolyta<note place='foot'>I., 3, 76.</note>
about a dead girl friend to whom she was devoted
when young. In the course of this beautiful passage she
says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 16'>The flower that I would pluck</l>
<l>And put between my breasts, then but beginning</l>
<l>To swell about the blossom, oh! she would long</l>
<l>Till she had such another, and commit it</l>
<l>To the like innocent cradle, where phœnix-like</l>
<l>They died in perfume.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>

<p>
I am ashamed to waste words in vindicating this passage,
which Boyle sets by the language of Iachimo in
Cymbeline in describing the mole on Imogen's breast<note place='foot'>II., 4, 134.</note> to
a company of gentlemen.
</p>

<p>
The next one is <q>decisive of the question of the authorship
of our play.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>1st Queen.</hi> When her arms,</l>
<l>Able to lock Jove from a synod, shall</l>
<l>By warranting moonlight corslet thee, O when</l>
<l>Her twinning cherries shall their sweetness fall<note place='foot'>Notice in passing that Beaumont is fond of using intransitive
verbs transitively. He also has the phrase <q>twinning
cherries.</q></note></l>
<l>Upon thy tasteful lips, what wilt thou think</l>
<l>Of rotten kings and blubbered queens? What care</l>
<l>For what thou feel'st not, what thou feel'st being able</l>
<l>To make Mars spurn his drum? O, if thou covet</l>
<l>But one night with her, every hour in't will</l>
<l>Take hostage of thee for a hundred, and</l>
<l>Thou shalt remember nothing more than what</l>
<l>That banquet bids thee to.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 195-206.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Though there are passages in Massinger of which the
thought is similar to that presented here, I do not judge
it or them as severely as Boyle. The point, however,
which I wish to make is this: these lines are typical of what
I have called the archaic flavour of the play. Where in
Massinger's works will you find <q>warranting moonlight,</q>
<q>tasteful lips,</q> <q>twinning cherries,</q> <q>rotten kings and
blubbered queens,</q> or <q>Mars' drum</q>? The idea that
Massinger wrote this passage is quite preposterous; the
only thing in it which reminds one of him is the <q>and</q>
at the end of line 204.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, we have Hippolyta's words in the same scene:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 34'>Yet I think</l>
<l>Did I not by the abstaining of my joy,</l>
<l>Which breeds a deeper longing, cure their surfeit</l>
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
<l>That craves a present medicine, I should pluck</l>
<l>All ladies' scandal on me.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 209-213.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Hippolyta agrees in these lines to postpone her wedding
in order that the Queens should be avenged on Creon.
No doubt the lines are crude, but Boyle goes too far with
his <q>cloven hoof,</q> his <q>effluvia of social corruption,</q> his
<q>thick miasma.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>There is a close parallel between <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble
Kinsmen</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi> in the treatment of madness.</q><note place='foot'>Page 395.</note>
I do not see much similarity between the prose
of the one play and the poetry of the other, but so far
as any exists it is due to the common ideas of the age
as to the way in which to treat the mad. <q>The reflections
in the dialogue of Palamon and Arcite,<note place='foot'>I., 2.</note> on the
corruptions of Thebes, the neglect of soldiers, the extravagance
of fashion, are allusions such as Massinger
makes to contemporary English life.</q><note place='foot'>Page 397.</note> The allusions
are such as any moralist might make, and if the rough
and immature style in which they are expressed is not
like Massinger's the argument falls to the ground.
</p>

<p>
<q>There are a good many expressions in common between
<hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi> and Massinger.</q><note place='foot'>Pages 380-391.</note> This is
the really serious argument; but let me repeat that similarity
of thought and expression in isolated phrases does
not prove unity of authorship. Let us, however, look at
some of these parallels.
</p>

<p>
Reference is twice made in <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi> to
<q>the wheaten garland</q> of brides.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 165; V., 1, 160.  Shakspere has <q>the wheaten
garland</q> of peace in <hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>, V., 2, 41.</note> Massinger refers to
<q>the garland</q> of a bridegroom in three passages.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, I., 1, 279; IV., 3, 164; <hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, I.,
2, 116.</note> I
fail to see the connexion. Notice also that Massinger
does not use the epithet <q>wheaten</q> in these passages.
</p>

<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>

<p>
Theseus says, <q>Troubled I am,</q> and turns away.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 82.</note> It
was quite natural that he should think twice before postponing
his wedding. Boyle compares a passage where
Ladislas is in uncertainty<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, III., 4, 61.</note>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I am much troubled,</l>
<l>And do begin to stagger.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
People in Massinger's plays are often perplexed, and
so they are in real life. Note that Theseus ends his remark
with these words at the beginning of a line. When
Massinger's characters are in perplexity their way of expressing
themselves is quite different; it is more full and
rounded off.
</p>

<p>
Theseus says: <q>Forward to the temple,</q><note place='foot'>I., 1, 141. The exact phrase occurs in <hi rend='italic'>Merchant of Venice</hi>,
II., 1, 44. <q>The temple</q> is part of Fletcher's stock-in-trade.</note> being anxious
to be married. <q>Similar words in similar situations
occur in Massinger.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, V., 2, 45; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 2, 306.</note> In neither case, however, is it a
bridegroom who speaks.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>, I., 165, 166:
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>1st Queen.</hi> And that work presents itself to th' doing;</l>
<l>Now 'twill take form, the heats are gone to-morrow.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Boyle says this is obscure, but can be explained by
<hi rend='italic'>Empress of the East</hi>:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>That resolution which grows cold to-day</l>
<l>Will freeze to-morrow.<note place='foot'>II., 1, 13.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The thought is a familiar one; and can anyone suppose
that Massinger wrote line 165?
</p>

<p>
The expression <q>our undertaker</q><note place='foot'>I., 1, 77.</note> recalls a word used
by Shakspere.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Twelfth Night</hi>, III., 4, 349.</note> Massinger also has it twice;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, III., 3, 78; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, V., 1, 27.</note> the parallel
is interesting, but the word was a cant political term of
Jacobean times.
</p>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<p>
The fact that apes imitate is referred to in these lines:<note place='foot'>1., 2, 47, 48.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 16'>'Tis in our own power&mdash;</l>
<l>Unless we fear that apes can tutor's&mdash;to</l>
<l>Be masters of our manners.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi> we find:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>You are master of the manners and the habit,</l>
<l>Rather the scorn of such as would live men,</l>
<l>And not, like apes, with servile imitation</l>
<l>Study prodigious fashions.<note place='foot'>I., 2, 275-278.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Surely there is no need to assume common authorship
here. The imitative ape has been common property
for a long time.
</p>

<p>
A peculiarity of a sick man is referred to, thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I must no more believe thee in this point</l>
<l>Than I will trust a sickly appetite,</l>
<l>That loathes even as it longs.<note place='foot'>I., 3, 91.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Massinger in <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi> has:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>No more of Love, good father,</l>
<l>It was my surfeit, and I loathe it now,</l>
<l>As men in fevers meat they fall sick on.<note place='foot'>IV., 2, 50.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The simile is a part of ordinary experience and literary
convention. You might as well argue that Massinger
wrote <hi rend='italic'>Euphues</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The jailer's daughter leaves the scene with this remark:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>It is a holiday to look on them; Lord, the difference of men.<note place='foot'>II., 1,66. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Margaret in <hi rend='italic'>Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay</hi>,
I., 3, <hi rend='italic'>ad finem</hi>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Lidia, in <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, when Sanazarro
seems to be treating her rudely, exclaims:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Oh, the difference of natures!<note place='foot'>II., 3, 151.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But she does not leave the stage.
</p>

<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>

<p>
We might say: Oh, the difference of styles! In the one
case we have a rustic maiden of low birth; in the other,
a lady justly offended.
</p>

<p>
I do not deny that some of the parallels are remarkable,
but they may be due to imitation or reminiscence. Take
the words:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 34'>Thou, O jewel,</l>
<l>O' th' wood, o' th' world, hast likewise blest a place</l>
<l>With thy sole presence.<note place='foot'>III., 1, 10.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi> we find:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 24'>And what place</l>
<l>Does he now bless with his presence?<note place='foot'>I., 1, 49. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. Bashful Lover</hi>, I., 1, 54; III., 3, 132.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The phrase is one which Massinger's courtly mind would
treasure and delight to use.
</p>

<p>
Theseus, addressing Artesius, says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'>Forth and levy</l>
<l>Our worthiest instruments, whilst we despatch</l>
<l>This grand act of our life, this daring deed</l>
<l>Of fate in wedlock.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 178-181.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Phrases like this are found in Massinger; thus in <hi rend='italic'>The
Maid of Honour</hi>, Roberto says of the wedding of Bertoldo
and Aurelia:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And rest assur'd that, this great work despatch'd,</l>
<l>You shall have audience.<note place='foot'>V., 2, 51. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, III., 2, 157; <hi rend='italic'>Duke
of Milan</hi>, V., 2, 82; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, IV., 2, 75; <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, V., 3,
108; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I., 1, 191. In these last instances marriage is
not referred to, nor is the word <q>despatched</q> used.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
They may be due to reminiscence, though it is simpler to
regard them as the current English of the day.
</p>

<p>
The strongest evidence for Boyle's theory is contained
in Palamon's invocation to Venus:<note place='foot'>V., 1, 106.</note>
</p>

<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 26'>I never practised</l>
<l>Upon man's wife, nor would the libels read</l>
<l>Of liberal wits; I never at great feasts</l>
<l>Sought to betray a beauty.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
These words certainly remind us of Leosthenes in <hi rend='italic'>The
Bondman</hi>, both in thought and style:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 26'>Nor endeavour'd</l>
<l>To make your blood run high at solemn feasts,</l>
<l>With viands that provoke; the speeding philtres;</l>
<l>I worked no bawds to tempt you; never practised</l>
<l>The cunning and corrupting arts they study</l>
<l>That wander in the wild maze of desire.<note place='foot'>II., 1, 128.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I think, however, that reminiscence will suffice to
account for the parallel. The man who could write the
last line of this passage has no need to buttress up his
fame with <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen</hi>, though it is of course
conceivable that he edited it for publication in 1634.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, the method of Massinger calls for a few words.
It has been noticed by all the critics that he often repeats
himself. As is the case with Plautus the same metaphors,
thoughts, and words recur from time to time in similar
situations. It is clear that this characteristic might
help us to trace those parts of Fletcher's plays in which
Massinger collaborated.
</p>

<p>
One or two simple instances of this fact may be quoted:
the characters in Massinger are very fond of blushing;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 2, 159, 163; <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, I., 1, 4; III.,
2, 70; IV., 1, 103; <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, I., 2, 75 and 155;
II., 1, 186; IV., 2, 88; V., 3, 40; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I., 2, 142; II., 3,
47; III., 5, 34: IV., 1, 86; <hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, I., 1, 175; III., 3,
214, 221 and 234; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, I., 3, 30; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of
Love</hi>, II., 2, 23; III., 3, 150; <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, II., 2, 28; IV.,
3, 99; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, III., 3, 68; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, I., 1, 31; III., 1,
17; III., 2, 49; <hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, I., 1, 321; <hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry</hi>, I., 1,
85; II., 2, 107 and 313; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, Prol., 2, 14;
II., 1, 324; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I., 3, 290; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, II., 1, 66. It is
true that blushing plays a great part in all our old dramatists.
Compare in Fletcher, <hi rend='italic'>False One</hi>, II., 3, <hi rend='italic'>ad finem</hi>; II., 6,
22; Leandro, in <hi rend='italic'>The Spanish Curate</hi>, I., 1; and in Shakspere,
<hi rend='italic'>Henry V</hi>, V., 2, 253; <hi rend='italic'>Much Ado</hi>, IV., 1, 35, 160-163; <hi rend='italic'>Antony
and Cleopatra</hi>, I., 1, 29; V., 2,149. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Eastward Ho</hi>, I., 1.
<q>Give me a little box on the ear, that I may seem to blush</q>;
II., 1. <q>As I am a lady, if he did not make me blush so that
mine eyes stood awater.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Every Man in his Humour</hi>, V., 1.
<q>Nay, Mistress Bridget, blush not.</q> <hi rend='italic'>The Devil is an Ass</hi>, I., 3;
<hi rend='italic'>Friar Bacon and Friar Bungay</hi>, I., 2; <hi rend='italic'>James IV.</hi>, III., 3.</note>
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
references to the talkativeness of women are frequent;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, III., 6, 55; IV., 2, 52; <hi rend='italic'>Old Law</hi>, III., 1, 272;
<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, IV., 5, 202.</note>
metaphors from the sea and sailing are very common;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 1, 43; II., 1, 71-75; <hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, I., 1,
157; II., 2, 119; V., 2, 267-270: <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, II., 1, 135
and 220: II., 3. 29; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, III., 3, 98-102; III., 4, 65; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>,
II., 1, 31-34; IV., 1, 147; V., 3, 76-81; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, III., 1,
8-10 and 42: III., 6, 6; IV., 1, 13 and 21; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>,
IV., 1, 59; IV., 3, 22; V., 3, 137; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, III., 2, 220; IV.,
3, 4; <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, V., 3, 21; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, V., 2, 12; V., 3,
146; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, II., 1, 420: <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, I., 1, 117;
IV., 3, 27.</note>
people are fond of saying that they mean to do something
but they do not know what;<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 2, 336:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Honoria.</hi> I am full of thoughts,<lb/>
And something there is here I must give form to,<lb/>
Though yet an embryon.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I., 3, 315; II., 1, 74-77; V., 2, 103; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, III.,
3, 97; <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, III., 2, 98; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, II., 3, 140;
<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, V., 1, 129; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, IV., 1, 200;
<hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, IV., 2, 105. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, III.,
3, 13; <hi rend='italic'>Thierry and Theodoret</hi>, I., 2.
</p>
<p>
It is a touch which goes back to Ovid's <hi rend='italic'>Metamorphoses</hi>, vi.
619: <q>Magnum quodcumque paravi: quid sit, adhuc dubito.</q></p></note> the exact courtier kneels
and kisses the robe of a lady or her foot, and is sometimes
rebuked for doing so.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, V., 1, 129; V., 2, 143; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 2,
127-129 and 152-153; III., 6, 34; IV., 1, 104; IV., 4, 16; V.,
3, 48; <hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, V., 1, 20; <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, I., 2, 14;
<hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, II., 1, 44; IV., 1, 38; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, III.,
2, 59; III., 3, 26; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, II., 3, 82; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the
East</hi>, I., 1, 95; I., 2, 148; II., 1, 158 and 334; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, II.,
2, 84; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, V., 1, 39; <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, III., 1, 67. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
also <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, IV., 1, 46; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, III., 3, 79; IV., 2,
104. Hortensio <q>kisses the ground</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, III.,
3, 124. This may merely mean to kneel (<hi rend='italic'>cf. ibid.</hi>, IV., 1, 168,
and <hi rend='italic'>Thierry and Theodoret</hi>, II., 3); but <hi rend='italic'>cf. Roman Actor</hi>, III.,
2, 193.</note>
</p>

<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>

<p>
As a good moralist, Massinger dislikes suicide<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Old Law</hi>, I., 1, 565;<hi rend='italic'> Believe as You List</hi>, IV., 2, 58-60,
90-92; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, II., 4, 11-13; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, II., 6, 13;
<hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, II., 4, 18; IV., 3, 127; <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, II.,
1, 71; IV., 2, 151. Donusa, the Turkish princess, recommends
it in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, III., 2, 83. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, I., 3,
210-212.</note> and
duelling.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, II., 1, 79-85; <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, V., 6, 40-54.
Fletcher is full of duels; thus the plot of <hi rend='italic'>The Little French
Lawyer</hi> in largely concerned with a duel. In <hi rend='italic'>Love's Progress</hi>
we have a duel in which the seconds fight; they want to do so
in <hi rend='italic'>The Honest Man's Fortune</hi>. In <hi rend='italic'>Love's Cure</hi>, V., 3, a duel
with seconds is commanded by the State. The illegality of
duels is referred to in <hi rend='italic'>The Maid's Tragedy</hi>, V., 4.</note> The latter practice is referred to in his plays
as a new-fangled importation from abroad.
</p>

<p>
Let us now quote some of his favourite words: references
need not be given for <q>honour</q>; wherever we find
<q>atheist</q> for a bad man,<note place='foot'>It is true that this use is not confined to Massinger, being
a common idiom of the day. I quote the passages where the
word is not used in a religious sense: <hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, IV.,
3, 81; <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, I., 1, 356; <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, I., 3, 126;
V., 3, 135; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I., 1, 176; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, IV., 1, 154. For
Webster's similar use of the word <hi rend='italic'>cf. The Duchess of Malfi</hi>, p.
61<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>The White Devil</hi>, pp. 29<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> and 47<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>.</note> or <q>magnificent</q> for munificent,<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, III., 3, 142; <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, I., 1. 87;
II., 1, 186; IV., 2, 85; <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, I., 1, 135;
III., 1, 14; V., 3, 10; <hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry</hi>, V., 2, 187; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of
Love</hi>, IV., 1, 8; IV., 4, 18; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, II., 1, 53; III., 4, 6;
<hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, II., 2, 60; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 3, 176; II., 2, 158, 307;
V., 3, 47; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, I., 1, 74; III., 1, 221; V., 4, 18;
<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, II., 1, 73, 147; III., 1, 28; III., 2, 82;
V., 3, 189; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, I., 2, 78; II., 4, 95. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Beggar's
Bush</hi>, V., 2. Ford uses <q>royal magnificence</q> in the same
way in <hi rend='italic'>Perkin Warbeck</hi> (II., 1). In Ben Jonson's <hi rend='italic'>Staple of
News</hi> (IV., 1) we find <q>very communicative and liberal, and
began to be magnificent.</q> In Greene's <hi rend='italic'>James IV</hi>, I., 1:
</p>
<p>
Your mightiness is so magnificent,<lb/>
You cannot choose but cast some gift apart.
</p>
<p>
The word <q>munificent</q> occurs in <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, IV., 2, 109.</p></note>
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
or the Latin phrase <q>nil ultra,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, IV., 3, 100; <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, II., 3,
49; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, IV., 3, 42; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, II., 3, 70;
<hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, V., 4, 231; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, IV., 1, 103; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, I.,
1, 217; <hi rend='italic'>cf. Prophetess</hi>, IV., 6, 57.</note> or the Greek words
<q>apostata</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, I., 1, 251, 393; <hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, III., 1,
28; IV., 3, 62; V., 2, 52; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, I., 1, 138; IV., 3, 159;
<hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, II., 2, 107 and 325; V., 1, 8.</note> and <q>embryon</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, III., 1, 358; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, II., 3, 141;
<hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, IV., 1, 200; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 2, 337; <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You
List</hi>, I., 2, 44. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. Thierry and Theodoret</hi>, II., 3.</note> wherever we find
<q>frontless</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, V., 1, 37; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1,
115; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, IV., 1, 77; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, II., 1, 138; <hi rend='italic'>Believe
as You List</hi>, IV., 4, 30. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. Cupid's Revenge</hi>, II., 2, <hi rend='italic'>ad finem</hi>.</note> impudence and <q>sail-stretched</q> wings<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, I., 1, 283; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I., 3, 23. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.
Prophetess</hi>, II., 3, 1.</note> and
<q>libidinous</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, V., 2, 234; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, III., 2, 17; IV.,
3, 34; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1, 221; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I., 1, 192;
III., 6, 17; V., 2, 132; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, III., 3, 88; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, III.,
4, 46; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, II., 1, 288.</note> Caesars; wherever the moisture of the
lips is compared to nectar,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, IV., 4, 93-95; V., 1, 14; <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>,
I., 2, 64; II., 1, 198; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, I., 3, 206; V., 2, 212;
<hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, II., 3, 94; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, II., 5, 59; V., 2, 52;
<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, II., 1, 355; IV., 5, 106; <hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, III.,
1, 75; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, III., 3, 33; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 3, 128; III., 5,
71. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. Love's Cure</hi>, I., 3.</note> wherever we read of
<q>the centre</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, IV., 4, 107; <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, IV., 1, 121;
<hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, III., 2, 17; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, III., 6, 29; <hi rend='italic'>Virgin
Martyr</hi>, V., 2, 238; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, V., 3, 109; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>,
II., 5, 159; <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, V., 2, 266. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. Hamlet</hi>, II., 2,
159; <hi rend='italic'>Troilus and Cressida</hi>, I., 3, 85. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Prophetess</hi>, II., 1;
V., 2; <hi rend='italic'>Spanish Curate</hi>, I., 2; <hi rend='italic'>Atheist's Tragedy</hi>, IV., 4; <hi rend='italic'>Honest
Whore</hi>, IV., 1; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Bees</hi>, char. vii.</note> or of <q>horror,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, I., 2, 75; <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, I., 1, 223; II.,
1, 145; V., 2, 293; <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, II., 1, 142; III., 1,
13; V., 3, 113; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1, 102; <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You
List</hi>, I., 1, 73; I., 2, 147; II., 1, 65; III., 3, 143; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>,
III., 2, 1; III., 3, 162; IV., 3, 6; V., 3, 156; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, III.,
5, 44; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 1, 79; II., 2, 130 and 155; IV., 1, 65; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>,
III., 6, 31; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, III., 4, 55; V., 3, 105; <hi rend='italic'>A Very
Woman</hi>, IV., 3, 210; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, II., 6, 19, and 50; IV., 2,
58; <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, II., 1, 178; III., 2, 116; V., 2, 67; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of
Milan</hi>, I., 1, 49; I., 3, 374; II., 1, 411; V., 2, 117.</note> or of washing an
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
Ethiop,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, III., 2, 94; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, V., 3, 144; <hi rend='italic'>Parliament
of Love</hi>, II., 2, 70. Bunyan has the phrase in <hi rend='italic'>The Pilgrim's
Progress</hi>, pt. ii.: <q>They saw one Fool and one Want-Wit
washing of an Ethiopian with intention to make him white,
but the more they washed him, the blacker he was.</q> Warner,
in his translation of <hi rend='italic'>The Menaechmi</hi> (1595), line 247, has <q>This
is the washing of a Blackamore.</q> The expression goes back
to Lucian <hi rend='italic'>adv. Indoct.</hi>, 28, Αἰθίοπα σμήχειν. It occurs in
<hi rend='italic'>Love's Cure</hi>, II., 2.</note> there we are on familiar ground. Again, it
is a characteristic of Massinger, which offends some
of his readers more than others, that he is always
ready with the obvious remark. Thus, when Marrall,
after a career of tergiversation is finally kicked off the
stage, he says:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 12'>This is the haven</l>
<l>False servants still arrive at.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, V., I, 349.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>, when the complications about
Paulinus' apple are getting rather serious, the Princess
Flaccilla makes the remark, which is certainly in the mind
of the reader:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>All this pother for an apple!<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, IV., 5, 213.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
When Leosthenes allows himself to be intolerably coarse
in his language to Cleora, we read these words:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Cleora.</hi> You are foul-mouth'd.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Archedamus.</hi> Ill-manner'd, too.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, V., 3, 95. <hi rend='italic'>Cf. Maid of Honour</hi>, II., 2, 180;
<hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, IV., 1, 138; V., 1, 56; <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, I., 1,
52; III., 1, 81; <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, III., 3, 25.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
When Hilario seeks to amuse his mistress with an absurd
message from the front, and she observes, <q>This is ridiculous,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, II., 1, 123.</note>
we feel inclined to say, <q>Not only ridiculous, but
not worth writing.</q> When Cardenes, after lying as dead
<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>
for some time, gives signs of life, the Viceroy very justly
observes:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>This care of his recovery, timely practis'd,</l>
<l>Would have expressed more of a father in you,</l>
<l>Than your impetuous clamours for revenge.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, I., 1, 404. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>,
V., 1, 149.  We cannot but remember poor Valentine's
prolonged but vocal agony in Gounod's opera.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It will be remembered that Shakspere had used this
device in his day. Compare <hi rend='italic'>Richard II</hi>: <q>Can sick men
play so nicely with their names?</q><note place='foot'>II., 1, 84.</note> <hi rend='italic'>Midsummer-Night's
Dream</hi>: <q>Lord, what fools these mortals be!</q><note place='foot'>III., 2, 115.</note>
<hi rend='italic'>1 Henry VI</hi>: <q>Here is a silly stately style indeed!</q><note place='foot'>IV., 7, 72.</note>
</p>

<p>
What impression do we get of Massinger from his
writings? He was the intimate friend and associate of
Fletcher; how far was he a man of the same stamp?
Both as a poet and a stylist Fletcher is his superior; he is
more tender and more varied; in isolated scenes he attains
a high degree of pathos. From time to time the bursts
of lovely poetry which illustrate his plays make us bow
the head as though in the presence of an enchanter. The
fifty plays which are currently associated with his name,
with all their faults, are a veritable fairyland. Again,
there is a terse piquancy about him, which expresses itself
in clear-cut, vigorous lines, such as we find rarely in our
poet. And he has a real vein of humour, which makes
one laugh heartily.<note place='foot'>Take as an example the death-bed scene in <hi rend='italic'>The Spanish
Curate</hi>, IV., 5.</note> Nor is his direct and lucid prose
style to be despised. On the other hand, he was not a
great artist; his plots, though usually bustling, are often
improbable; his character-drawing is constantly fickle
and inconsequent. Thus, according to Boyle,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E. S.</hi>, VIII., 2.</note> in <hi rend='italic'>The
Honest Man's Fortune</hi>, Tourneur and Massinger make
Montague a gentleman; in Act V. Fletcher destroys all
that was good in Massinger, but makes good sport for
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
the groundlings. He maintains that the same thing
happens to Buckingham in <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> and to Barnavelt.
Though there are many life-like characters in his works,
to whom we feel attracted, such as Leon in <hi rend='italic'>Rule a Wife
and have a Wife</hi> and Valerio in <hi rend='italic'>The Wife for a Month</hi>, they
are too often made to do improbable things. Again, as a
moralist Fletcher falls far behind Massinger. He shows
from time to time a high-flown and tainted sentimentality
which is far removed from real life. Indeed, the bad use
to which he puts his great talent is often enough to make
angels weep. He more than anyone is responsible for the
Puritan reaction; he more than anyone is responsible
for most of what was bad in the Restoration drama,
and he has had his reward. Except by the student, his
work is forgotten. It can hardly be doubted that the
death of Fletcher was a gain to Massinger in emancipating
him from the co-operation of a fascinating but unsafe
guide.<note place='foot'><p>Some idea of the way in which the two poets collaborated
may be obtained from the facts collected in <ref target='Appendix_III'>Appendix III.</ref>
Diderot, in a passage quoted by Twining, in his edition of
Aristotle's <hi rend='italic'>Poetics</hi> (p. 253), recommends collaboration: <q>On
seroit tenté de croire qu'un drame devrait être l'ouvrage de
deux hommes de génie, l'un qui arrangeât, et l'autre qui
fit parler</q> (<hi rend='italic'>De la Poés. Dram.</hi>, p. 288). What Euripides
thought of the arrangement will be seen in The Andromache,
lines 476-77:
</p>
<p>
τόνων θ᾽ ὕμνου συνεργάταιν δυοῖν<lb/>
ἔριν Μοῦσαι φιλοῦσι κραίειν.
</p>
<p>
It is clear that the early death of Beaumont was a disaster
to Fletcher.</p></note> In standing alone he learnt to perfect all that was
best in his own gifts.
</p>

<p>
It is difficult to form a clear judgment of Beaumont.
The more I read what scholars attribute to him, the more
I feel disposed to agree with Sir A. Ward that Beaumont
and Fletcher were men of the same mind and tastes.
It is plain that the author of <hi rend='italic'>Philaster</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Maid's Tragedy</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>A King and No King</hi> had a range of passion and pathos
beyond Massinger. <hi rend='italic'>Philaster</hi> is incomparable, and as we
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
read the other two plays we hurry on from scene to scene;
when we put the book down we are perturbed. They
have carried us away in spite of their grave faults. The
glorious nonsense of <hi rend='italic'>The Knight of the Burning Pestle</hi> is
equally beyond Massinger. On the other hand, such disagreeable
plays as <hi rend='italic'>The Coxcomb</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Cupid's Revenge</hi> do
not invite a second perusal. I do not feel that Beaumont
was cleaner in mind than Fletcher, or more balanced in
judgment. When we come to the department of metre
we seem to be on surer ground; the metre of Beaumont
has high qualities, and his decasyllabic verse reminds me
of the cold purity of a waterfall. In style his lines constantly
have a marked simplicity and directness which
anticipate Wordsworth. He can write a line in which
the words run in the order which they would have in
prose, and hence his great strength. On the other hand,
he is often careless about the length of his lines, possibly
from a love of variety. He is fond of rhyme, and introduces
prose freely into his scenes. His models appear to
have been Marlowe for metre and Ben Jonson for treatment.
He has a liking for burlesque, as witness <hi rend='italic'>The
Knight of the Burning Pestle</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Woman-Hater</hi>, and
Arbaces in <hi rend='italic'>A King and No King</hi>.<note place='foot'>Massinger's only attempt at burlesque&mdash;Hilario in <hi rend='italic'>The
Picture</hi>&mdash;though ludicrous, is dramatically impossible.</note> All this is very unlike
Massinger.
</p>

<p>
It may be asked, how does Massinger compare with
Webster? This question naturally rises in the mind at
a moment when a gifted writer, snatched from us before
his time, has left us an interesting and scholarly study of
Webster. Mr. Rupert Brooke makes no secret of his
contempt for Fletcher, and <q>the second-rate magic</q>
of Massinger; he regards Webster as the last of the strong
school of Elizabethan dramatists.
</p>

<p>
Are we to compare <hi rend='italic'>Westward Ho!</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Northward Ho!</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>The Cure for a Cuckold</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>A New Way to pay Old
Debts</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>? They are less refined, less
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
skilfully constructed. The stage is more crowded, and
the characters are worse drawn. The same considerations
apply to the <hi rend='italic'>Malcontent</hi><note place='foot'>It is generally believed now that Marston wrote this
play. He was an author of surprising vigour, and a master
of strong English, but his taste is bad, and all his work lacks
finish.</note> and <hi rend='italic'>The Devil's Law-case</hi>.
Mr. Brooke practically allows that he means by Webster,
<hi rend='italic'>The White Devil</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Duchess of Malfi</hi>, and these plays
alone. Let it be said at once that it is an ungrateful
task to magnify one poet at the expense of another.
We allow that in these two plays Webster comes nearer
to Shakspere than any of his compeers. He has a great,
a subtle, a well-stored mind; he produces isolated tragic
effects of the most poignant kind; he is a master of atmosphere;
he plays with the feelings of his auditors; he can
dazzle them by <q>his miraculous touches of poetic beauty.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, he is not a clear thinker, nor are
his plays skilfully planned. I should imagine that they
read better than they act. For instance, the scene in
<hi rend='italic'>The Duchess of Malfi</hi>, where Ferdinand gives the heroine
the dead hand, fills us with horror. I doubt if it would
be effective on the stage. Webster's rhymes are poor,
and his prose worse than Massinger's. Sir Sidney Lee<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>D. N. B.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi></note>
says his blank verse is <q>vigorous and musical</q>; to me
it seems too often ragged and halting. But the chief
objection to Webster is that he lives in <q>a world of repulsive
themes and fantastic crimes.</q> He revels in the
sinister suggestions aroused by skulls, dead hands, ghosts,
echoes, and madmen. His mind was morbid, and his successes
are like lightning flashes of splendid power piercing
a gloomy and sullen background.
</p>

<p>
The fact that he was not a productive writer may weigh
less with some critics than with others; more important
is it to remember that Massinger's plays held the stage
much longer than Webster's. This fact may fairly be
taken to prove the appeal which the former has successfully
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
made to the human heart. Webster, in short, compared
with Shakspere, reminds us somewhat of the contrast
between Mantegna and Raphael.
</p>

<p>
In one or two respects Webster has affinities with Massinger.
Both frequently imitate Shakspere; and both
repeat themselves continually, though in different ways.
Whereas Massinger used the same vocabulary and terms
of thought again and again, Webster quotes whole sentences
from one of his plays in another, as if he felt, like
some of the Greek writers of antiquity, that when he had
said a thing as it should be said, he had the right to use it
again.<note place='foot'>Dorothea's story of the King of Egypt (<hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>,
III., 1, 163-182) reminds us of an expedient familiar in Webster.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is difficult to compare Massinger with Ben Jonson:
both wrote Roman plays and domestic comedies; but
Ben Jonson has at once a greater mind and a wider range
of experiment. He was a learned man, a great figure
in society, the dictator of a circle of wits, the centre of
many friendships and enmities. He would probably
regard Massinger as a pale-featured, gentle hack. We
know more about his full-blooded personality than about
any other writer of the period, and while there is much in
him to offend, there is more to inspire our respect.
</p>

<p>
Our immediate object is to compare the two writers
as dramatists. It is at once clear that they work on different
lines. Massinger is a follower of Shakspere and
Fletcher, though we can trace in some of his tragedies
the influence of Webster and Tourneur. In his comedies,
we see some approximation to Ben Jonson; it is instructive
to compare <hi rend='italic'>Eastward Ho!</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>. A
fundamental difference of method is at once seen; Massinger
deliberately eschews the use of prose. It must at
once be conceded that he has left nothing on so colossal
a scale as <hi rend='italic'>Every Man in his Humour</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Volpone</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Epicoene</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Alchemist</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Bartholomew Fair</hi>. Here we find
skilful plot, masterly characterization, and ludicrous combinations.
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
How heartily we laugh over the Plautine
scene before Cob's house in <hi rend='italic'>Every Man in his Humour</hi>,<note place='foot'>IV., 8.</note>
or at the intrusion of unbidden guests at Morose's wedding,
or at the deception practised on the two knights in
the gallery.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Epicoene</hi>, IV., 2.</note> How dazzled we are with the kaleidoscopic
<q>vapours</q> of the great Fair. On the other hand, in what
Dryden calls the <q>dotages,</q> we find a great falling off.
Ben Jonson can be very dull. Still even in <hi rend='italic'>The Devil is an
Ass</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Staple of News</hi> there is a vein of original fancy,
which reminds us that we are dealing with no imitator,
but with an original and poetical mind. Nor must we
forget the splendid series of Masques, into which Ben
Jonson put some of his best work; to this Massinger has
but little to oppose. And then, as we all know, Ben
Jonson bursts out from time to time with a great lyric,
whereas Massinger's songs are commonplace. Lastly, in
<hi rend='italic'>The Case is Altered</hi>, we have a plot in the manner of Fletcher
which is so successful as to make us regret that Jonson
did not try this type of play again. Though it has not
the atmosphere of Massinger, it has something of the
mellow graciousness at which he, like Fletcher, aimed.
</p>

<p>
It would be silly to deny Jonson's superiority of intellect,
and of attainment when at his best. His faults
are, however, very serious. Though he can draw a man
of good breeding, his women are very ordinary. He is
too fond of incorporating long passages from the classical
authors whom he knew so well; he would have been
more attractive if he had used Aristophanes and Plautus,
Ovid and Libanius, as inspirations rather than as materials.
The notes on Sejanus are a liberal education, but after
all, <q>the play's the thing.</q> The use of <q>humour</q> and
<q>vapours,</q> though at first brilliant and captivating, even
becomes artificial and tedious; no one is the embodiment
of one passion or weakness. Let us be thankful that
human nature is not so simple or consistent, for in that
case it would cease to interest. More serious still, Jonson
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
has no sense of proportion; we read Knowell's soliloquy
in <hi rend='italic'>Every Man in his Humour</hi>,<note place='foot'>II., 3.</note> and we say, <q>Fine! but too
long</q>; and we say this again and again as we read his
works. The great length of the fifth act of Sejanus is a
good instance of this fault. Indeed, it is impossible that
the play was acted in the form which we now have&mdash;it
would have emptied the house, like Burke's speeches.
When Jonson gets on to some subject of which he knows
the technical terms, such as <q>fucuses</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Devil is an Ass</hi>, IV., 1. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> the light touch of Massinger
when dealing with the toilet of a lady in <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>,
I., 1, 30-59.</note> or <q>alchemy,</q>
he is almost as tedious as Kipling's Macandrew. His
plots are at times too skilful; thus, even Brainworm in
time gets on our nerves. His coarseness is that of a
common soldier, and his puns are bad.
</p>

<p>
Are there any points of contact between the two
authors? I do not wish to suggest that Massinger owed
nothing to the older writer, though parallels of diction
may mean little but the simultaneous use of the idioms
of the day. Thus in <hi rend='italic'>The Staple of News</hi> we find, <q>I do
write man,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Staple of News</hi>, I., 1; III., 1&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, I., 1,
118; III., 2, 58.</note> <q>blacks,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, I., 2&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry</hi>, II., 1, 51.</note> <q>kiss close,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, II., 1&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, IV., 2, 103. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Alchemist</hi>,
IV., 2.</note> <q>nectar,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IV., 1&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi> in Massinger.</note>
<q>magnificent</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IV., 1&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi> in Massinger.</note>; tossing in a blanket is referred to,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IV., 1&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, IV., 5, 12.</note>
and the saints<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IV., 1&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, I., 1, 31.</note> at Amsterdam, while the cook's fortifications<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>, IV., 1&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>New Way</hi>, I., 2, 25. (<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Prologue
to <hi rend='italic'>A Wife for a Month</hi>.)</note>
remind us of a passage in <hi rend='italic'>A New Way to pay Old
Debts</hi>. In Sejanus we find <q>passive fortitude</q> commended.<note place='foot'>IV., 5&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, IV., 1, 155; <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>,
V., 2, 17.</note>
<q>He puts them to their whisper,</q><note place='foot'>III., 2&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, I., 3, 95.</note> reminds us
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
of <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>. Sejanus' change of temper to his
satellites<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Sejanus</hi>, V., 7&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, V., 2, 61.</note> when he fancies danger is past resembles that
of Domitian in the same play. <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi> has
touches of plot and style which recall Volpone.
</p>

<p>
There is, however, little contact between Ben Jonson
and Massinger. Their births were separated by only ten
years, but a much longer period than that seems to divide
them. Friend of the great as he was, Ben Jonson was yet
an Aristophanic, nay, a Rabelaisian democrat; Massinger
is a gentleman and a courtier. The one has the vigour
and immaturity of the Elizabethan age, and in him we
feel in contact with the obsolete Mystery and Morality
plays;<note place='foot'>Courthope lays far too much stress on Massinger's imitation
of the Morality (<hi rend='italic'>History of English Poetry</hi>, vol. iv., p. 352).
It only appears in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>.</note> the other has the refinement and romance of the
Caroline era. The one is a powerful satirist and a pugnacious
fighter; the other lives in an ideal world. On the
one side is <foreign rend='italic'>vis consili expers</foreign>; on the other, a more limited
intellect with a surer artistic sense. If I may venture to
say so, they differ from one another as an apple from a
pear. I do not deny that Ben Jonson was the greater
man, but I find him more archaic and more difficult to
read than Massinger. Much of the interest of his plays
is dead for us, his local colour and topical allusions, which
require so many notes, are more tedious; his personal
likes and dislikes, his egotism, his vanity, are wearisome;
and though his blank verse is strong and manly,
it is not so melodious as Massinger's. The older man
stands foursquare and solitary; the younger man reaches
forward to posterity, and we feel him to be linked by his
art and grace to ourselves. Though Dryden never
mentions Massinger, there is a dignified capacity which
is common to the two authors.
</p>

<p>
Massinger's chief rival in the latter part of his life was
Shirley. Shirley's plays are full of interest; his graceful
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
style rises occasionally into poetry, at which the author
himself seems to smile; his plots are full of ingenious
turns; his female characters are more confidently developed
than Massinger's, nor is he unable to draw a
lifelike man, as we see from Lorenzo in <hi rend='italic'>The Traitor</hi> and
Columbo in <hi rend='italic'>The Cardinal</hi>. He excels in the battledore
and shuttlecock of love-making; he tells us far more of
the manner of well-bred contemporary society than Massinger.
Indeed, it is probable that he had a greater success
in his day than his rival, and was more in touch with
Court circles, though even the loyal Shirley discreetly
satirizes from time to time the government of Charles I.
He is not devoid of humour and epigram; his dialogue is
light and sprightly. He reaches back to Fletcher and forward
to Dryden; we seem, as we read his plays, to be a
long way removed from the labour of Jonson, the pomp
of Chapman, the vernal simplicity of Heywood. On the
other hand, we miss in him the breadth and strength,
the dignity, the nobility, and the fire of Massinger. He is
more of a photographer than a painter. Though his style
has eloquence, the thought is often far from clear, and the
long sentences are clumsy. There is something slight
and unsubstantial about the whole thing, while the metre
is continually careless and lame.
</p>

<p>
In assigning Massinger's place in the drama of his age,
we have to remember that the period falls into two well-defined
parts. He has very little in common with Marlowe,
Greene, and Peele, and still less with the charming
Dresden china of Lyly. Marlowe's generation breathes
the freshness and vehemence of the spring, while Massinger
reflects the silver lights of September. So rapid
was the development of fifty years, that to pass from the
one to the other is like going from the lancet windows of
Salisbury Cathedral to the tracery of William of Wykeham.
While we miss the purity and simplicity of Early English,
it would be foolish to ignore the strength of design and
proportion that maturity and experience brought. The
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
towers and battlements, the lierne vaulting, the large
windows, and generous clerestories of Perpendicular do
much to atone for the spiritless detail and mechanical
wall-panelling. A similar consideration applies to the
Jacobean dramatists when compared with their Elizabethan
predecessors.
</p>

<p>
Shall I be thought presumptuous in setting Massinger
against Shakspere? The attempt may, at any rate, help
to elicit a true estimate; the suggestion has often been
made before. Shakspere seems to have been from his
writings a man of great receptivity, unerring knowledge
of human nature, profound wisdom, and infinite sweetness,
the master of all the arts which we associate with a
good poet. Massinger reminds us of Ben Jonson, though
he is less consciously clever, less cumbered with learning,
less combative.<note place='foot'>There are no signs in Massinger of literary or other private
quarrels. One or two passages seem to be inspired by sarcasm
directed on the gossip of the day&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, III., 2,
18-55.</note> He is modest,<note place='foot'><p>Stress is laid more than once on Massinger's modesty in
the commendatory verses from his friends. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Sir Thomas
Jay's verses prefixed to <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, and Prologue to <hi rend='italic'>A Very
Woman</hi>, lines 5, 6; Prologue to <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, line 4. This
feature may account for a lack of worldly wisdom and self-assertion,
which prevented him from reaping the full fruits
of the fame which he deserved as Fletcher's collaborator in so
many plays. Gerard Langbaine, in his <hi rend='italic'>Account of the English
Dramatic Poets</hi> (Oxford, 1691), pp. 353-60, deals thus with
Massinger: <q>He was extremely beloved by the poets of that
age, and there were few but what took it as an honour to club
with him in a play&mdash;witness Middleton, Rowley, Field, and
Dekker, all which join'd with him in several labours.  Nay
further, to shew his excellency, the ingenious Fletcher took
him in as a partner in several plays. He was a man of much
modesty and extraordinary parts.</q> In <hi rend='italic'>The New Year's Gift</hi>
to his patroness, to be found in MS. in the library of Trinity
College, Dublin, we have an indication that Massinger was
ashamed of the profession of author; we read (lines 19-21):
</p>
<p>
Nor slight it, Madam, since what some in me<lb/>
Esteem a blemish, is a gift as free<lb/>
As their best fortunes.
</p>
<p>
The last lines of the poem (43-46) show the familiar combination
of modesty and independence:
</p>
<p>
What I give I am rich in, and can spare;<lb/>
Nor part for hope with aught deserves my care;<lb/>
He that hath little and gives nought at all<lb/>
To them that have, is truly liberal.
</p></note> manly, lucid, sane, and
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
sensible, capable of just indignation, one who respects
himself, a faithful friend,<note place='foot'>There are some fine friendships in Massinger&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, Charalois
and Romont in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>; Farnese and Uberti in
<hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>; Cleremond and Montrose in <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament
of Love</hi>; Antoninus and Macrinus in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>;
Pedro and Antonio in <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>.</note> and a wide reader; he knows a
gentleman when he sees him; he can pay compliments
with good breeding; he has had his ups and downs in life;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> the Prologues to <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the
East</hi>. He speaks with feeling of the ungratefulness of
courtiers. (<hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, V., 1, 52; <hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, II., 2,
110.)</note>
he is one who understood men better than women, and
who, like Sir Thomas Browne, <q>loved a soldier</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 2, 255; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I., 3, 300; <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural
Combat</hi>, I., 1, 404; <hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover</hi>, I., 1, 34; <hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of
Florence</hi>, II., 1, 138; <hi rend='italic'>Sir J. V. O. Barnavelt</hi>, I., 1 (p. 215,
Bullen's Old Plays); also the character of the Captain in <hi rend='italic'>A
Very Woman</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Knight of Malta</hi>, III., 2.</note> a
vigorous and business-like artist, he is never worsted by
his theme, but makes it lifelike and interesting, with an
unerring instinct for what is effective on the stage, his
very faults being largely due to this useful knowledge.
That there was a strain of noble melancholy in his mind
can hardly be denied.<note place='foot'><p>Very significant are the words of Paulo in <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>
(IV., 1, 153):
</p>
<p>
Who fights<lb/>
With passions, and o'ercomes them is endued<lb/>
With the best virtue, passive fortitude.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, I., 1, 118; III., 1, 113; <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, III.,
1, 73; and <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, I., 1, 79:
</p>
<p>
All that I challenge<lb/>
Is manly patience.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Sejanus</hi>, quoted above, p. 115, n. 11. <hi rend='italic'>Queen of Corinth</hi>,
III, 2:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Euphanes.</hi> To shew the passive fortitude the best.
</p>
<p>
And <hi rend='italic'>Lover's Progress</hi>, IV., 4:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>alcidon.</hi> With all care put on<lb/>
The surest armour, anvil'd in the shop<lb/>
Of passive fortitude.
</p>
<p>
This point is emphasized in Swinburne's excellent sonnet on
Massinger.</p></note> The character which seems to me
to embody Massinger himself is Charalois in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
Dowry</hi>. Whether he was musical I should doubt after
the perfunctory reference to the art in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV., 2, 17-31, where Charalois declares, <q>I never was an
enemy to 't [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, music], Beaumont,</q> and ends by saying:
<q>I love it to the worth of 't and no further.</q></note>
We find nothing in his plays like the famous idyllic description
in Ford's <hi rend='italic'>Lover's Melancholy</hi>.<note place='foot'>I., 1.</note> On the other hand,
he knew that vocal and instrumental music were effective
in a play; we need go no farther than the end of Act
IV. in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi> for proof of this.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also V., 2, 130-37.</note> And Cario
uses the terms of music with great precision in <hi rend='italic'>The
Guardian</hi>.<note place='foot'>IV., 2, 1-14.</note> On the whole we get the impression that he
was an example of a rare combination, modesty with
independence of mind, a fact which, considering what the
circumstances of the literary life then were, is quite
enough to explain the hard struggle he seems to have
undergone.
</p>

<p>
It may be said that I am comparing a mighty genius
with a second-rate intellect. Are there any points in
which Massinger can hold his own against Shakspere?
Granted that he falls short in passion, imagination,<note place='foot'><p>Massinger has some notable compound epithets from time
to time; take as examples, <q>pale-cheek'd stars</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Parliament
of Love</hi>, IV., 2, 61; <q>on black-sail'd wings of loose and base
desires,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1, 215; <q>Such is my full-sail'd
confidence in her virtue,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 2, 318; <q>the
brass-leaved book of fate,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, I., 2, 136.
</p>
<p>
<q>Your must and will<lb/>
Shall in your full-sailed confidence deceive you,</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, II., 2, 21.</p></note> wit,
diction, rhythm, lyric rapture, where does he shine?
</p>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<p>
It may at first hearing sound snobbish to point out that
he was a University man, but a good deal of truth lies
hidden in that simple phrase. Shakspere's plays are
marked by many faults of construction, taste, and detail;
he who never blotted a line should certainly, as Ben
Jonson remarked, have blotted a good many. It always
seems to me that this is a line of thought which is too
much ignored by those who believe that Shakspere wrote
his own plays, and that Bacon had nothing to do with
them. The Baco-Shaksperians point, and very justly, to
the surprising knowledge and culture shown in the plays;
they refuse to believe that all this can have come from
the brain of a Warwickshire rustic, forgetting the faults
which are so glaring, faults which are precisely those which
a learned and accurate scholar like Bacon would have
avoided.
</p>

<p>
Now Massinger is a correct and artistic writer. The
little tricks of style which were so dear to his mighty
predecessor, the pun, the alliteration,<note place='foot'>We find not a few assonances and alliterations in Massinger,
generally contained in two words: <hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, I.,
2, 16, <q>gallows and galleys</q>; (<hi rend='italic'>Cf. Renegado</hi>, V., 2, 162,
<q>the gallies or the gallows,</q> and Webster's <hi rend='italic'>White Devil</hi>,
p. 11a); <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, Prologue 14, <q>toss'd and
turned</q>; <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, I., 1, 109, <q>sue and send</q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, IV., 1, 37, <q>sway and swing</q> (so in
<hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, II., 2, 46); <hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry</hi>, IV., 1,
193, <q>confessor and confounder</q>; <hi rend='italic'>Old Law</hi>, III., 2, 45, <q>die
and dye</q>; <hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, 157, <q>venues in Venice glasses</q>; IV., 1, 61,
<q>Siren and Hiren</q>; <hi rend='italic'>City Madam</hi>, I., 1, 36, <q>hole and hell</q>;
V., 2, 77, <q>lords or lowns</q>; <hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, I., 1, 60, <q>house and
home</q>; II., 2, 23, <q>board and bed</q>; II., 5, 46, <q>fair and
free</q>; III., 5, 76, <q>page or porter</q>; <hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, IV., 1, 65,
<q>horns and horror</q>; <hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, II., 1, 119, <q>hell and horror</q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, I., 4, 63, <q>graced and greased</q>; II., 1, 376,
<q>carke and caring</q>; <hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, III., 4, 54, <q>toss and touse</q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, II., 1, 8, <q>tractable and tactable</q>;
<hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, III., 1, 199, <q>palm or privilege</q>; III., 2, 46,
<q>curvet or caper.</q></note> the conceit,
the verbal quibble,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Johnson's Preface to Shakspere (p. 19), <q>A quibble
is to Shakspere what luminous vapours are to the traveller;
he follows it at all adventures; it is sure to lead him out of
his way, and sure to engulf him in the mire.</q> The whole
paragraph is worth reading.</note> are far less obtrusive; he is free from
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
that affectation and precious obscurity which are so
marked in Shakspere's later style. And one small point
may be noticed in passing here, as an indication of good
breeding: the characters in Massinger very seldom address
one another by name. It is significant that Greedy and
Overreach both offend in this way.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, I., 3, 22; II., 1, 31, etc. The repetition of
Graccho's name in <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, V., 1, is intentional and effective.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Kitely's repetition of <q>Thomas</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Every Man in
His Humour</hi>, III., 2; <q>Sir Michael</q> in <hi rend='italic'>1 Henry IV</hi>, IV., 4,
and <q>Sir Thomas</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>, V., 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
Though it is true that these faults were common to the
age, they are so marked in Shakspere that it is impossible
to ignore them in any estimate of the man. In the
details of style, then, Massinger can claim credit for
being more correct. In a word, what he lacks in genius
and poetry he supplies to a certain extent by good taste
and education. He shares this advantage with his age,
which was learning to correct the errors of the past; the
English language was advancing rapidly to more maturity
and balance than it had in the previous generation.
</p>

<p>
I have already pointed out the careful study of Shakspere
which we find in Massinger, and the copious use of
his imperial vocabulary. When we take into account
all the elements of the problem, when we make allowance
for quantity of work done, as well as for quality, would it
be too much to say that Massinger is as the pupil to the
master, and that, though separated by <q>a long interval,</q>
he comes second?<note place='foot'>Boyle (<hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, 371-372), severe as he is on Massinger's
characters, both male and female, agrees with this verdict.
He traces the unjust depreciation of Massinger in part to
Charles Lamb's <q>unfair judgment.</q> <q>The hard fate that
accompanied the 'stage poet' through life has clung to him up
to the present time, and in spite of warm advocates, like Gifford
and Cunningham, prevented him from occupying his legitimate
position as a dramatist immediately after Shakspere.</q></note> This may seem a hard saying,
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
unless it is explained. I allow that Ben Jonson had
a greater intellect; that Beaumont and Fletcher had
more genius, more pathos, more humour; that Marlowe,
Webster, and Ford, each in his own way, were greater
poets. I put Massinger next to Shakspere as a dramatist
pure and simple, because his best work is well-constructed
and interesting, his style and metre entrancing, his atmosphere
charming and easy, yet ideal, his morality mature
and sane. And in praising his morality, I do not lay
stress on the benefits to be derived from the use of his plays
as a school-book, though that consideration is not to be
despised but rather maintain that in avoiding abnormal,
tainted, and morbid themes he is in advance of his age;
consequently he is easier for us to read and understand
than other writers whose gifts were greater than his;
he makes a successful and enduring appeal to the <foreign rend='italic'>communis
sensus</foreign> of mankind.
</p>

<p>
I now proceed to a short critical estimate of Massinger's
plays. The most famous are <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>
in tragedy, and <hi rend='italic'>A New Way to pay Old Debts</hi> in comedy.
Opinions have differed strangely about <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>.
It went through four editions in quarto in the seventeenth
century, a fact which testifies to its immediate popularity.
Davies<note place='foot'>Preface, p. lvii. of Monck Mason's edition.</note> considered it far inferior to any of his
other productions, and Mason was equally severe. Even
Hallam confessed that parts of it were far from pleasing.
There can be no doubt that these parts of the play, which
the critics now unanimously ascribe to Dekker, are responsible
for giving Massinger a bad name for coarseness.
It is hard to carry supernatural machinery through, as
Fletcher's <hi rend='italic'>Prophetess</hi> shows, and we have here an Angel,
and a Devil, but they are on the whole managed successfully.
The first act is admirably proportioned; the fourth
and fifth also are masterly. There are a thrill and a
glamour in the style of this play unlike anything else in
Massinger, due perhaps to the religious problem dealt
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
with.<note place='foot'>For another explanation, see <ref target='Appendix_X'>Appendix X</ref>.</note> The only fault of Dorothea is that, like other good
people, she is a bad judge of character. It gives us a
shock to find Spungius and Hircius members of her
household, and at least we feel she should not have put
her charities in their hands, but should have attended to
the poor herself.<note place='foot'>Alinda, the heroine of Fletcher's <hi rend='italic'>Pilgrim</hi>, is equally indiscriminate
in her bounty (Act I., 1, 2). We may compare
J. Taylor's <hi rend='italic'>Holy Living</hi>, Sec. VIII., Alms: <q>Trust not your
alms to intermedial uncertain and under-dispensers.</q></note> The Princess Artemia is a type common
in Massinger.<note place='foot'>Where did he get her name from? A lady of the name
is a subordinate character in Hroswitha's <hi rend='italic'>Gallicanus</hi>. The
plays of Hroswitha have obvious affinities with <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin
Martyr</hi>, but I cannot trace any other indications of borrowing.</note>
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>A New Way to pay Old Debts</hi> we have an ingenious
plot which never flags, adequate comedy, and characters
which are appropriately, if not very carefully, drawn.
The style is strong and natural; it is not far from this play
to Goldsmith, and indeed the eighteenth century must
have owed much to it. In its atmosphere of ease and
propriety there are no harsh lights or discordant tints.
</p>

<p>
The central idea of the plot was probably borrowed
from a play of admirable vivacity and dexterity, Middleton's
<hi rend='italic'>Trick to catch the Old One</hi>, which appeared in 1607.
What has Massinger added to Middleton? He has made
the plot more probable, refining the characters, and
raising the whole thing from prose to poetry. We laugh
less, but we admire more, for we feel that we are seeing
something transacted which might have happened.
</p>

<p>
Sir Giles Overreach is Massinger's masterpiece, a
superman of colossal wickedness, with no belief in the
honour or virtue of men or women.<note place='foot'>Brander Matthews, as a fellow-countryman of Jay Gould
and Rockefeller, is well qualified to estimate Sir Giles Overreach;
he points out that he is an instance of what the French
call, <q>l'homme fort.</q> The part has been taken by many of our
great actors, notably Garrick, who revived it in 1745. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
W. Hazlitt's <hi rend='italic'>Dramatic Essays</hi> for the performances of Kean and
Kemble in 1816 (pp. 78-80, 91-92, 97-100). The two great actors
had a different conception of Sir Giles; and Hazlitt is very
severe upon Kemble. Kean was at Drury Lane, Kemble at
Covent Garden.</note> Though fond of
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
money, he is not a miser, but loves to lavish his gains;
power is rather his foible; repeated success has made him
reckless; his aim is to increase his estates by bullying
his poorer neighbours, and by employing the sharp practices
of the law. But he has yet one other ambition, to
see his only daughter married to a lord and to hear her
styled <q>Right Honourable.</q> His unscrupulousness is expressed
in often-quoted passages of great power; his frantic
anger in the fifth act is depicted with a skill which leaves
no sympathy in our minds for a father whose only daughter
has treated him badly. Here Massinger is more successful
than his great model in the case of Shylock and Jessica.
I cannot agree that it is inconsistent with the character
of Sir Giles that he should be anxious for his daughter
to marry a lord&mdash;there are several passages in the earlier
part of the play which show that he is not only a bully
but a base-born snob.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> II., 1, 81 and 88.</note>
</p>

<p>
Where so much is admirable it is difficult to make
selection, but we may point out that Wellborn's character
is a fine piece of work; we pity his disgrace, we rejoice
in his success, we believe in his desire to do better
in the future. The grief of Lady Allworth for her husband
and the jealous fears of young Allworth when Lord
Lovell is to meet Margaret are excellently drawn. There
are, moreover, touches of poetry in the play of a high
order, as, for instance:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Allworth.</hi>                              If ever</l>
<l>The queen of flowers, the glory of the spring,</l>
<l>The sweetest comfort to our smell, the rose,</l>
<l>Sprang from an envious briar, I may infer,</l>
<l>There's such disparity in their conditions,</l>
<l>Between the goodness of my soul, the daughter,</l>
<l>And the base churl, her father.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 146.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>

<p>
Or in Allworth's speech about his love:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Add this too; when you feel her touch, and breath</l>
<l>Like a soft western wind, when it glides o'er</l>
<l>Arabia, creating gums and spices;</l>
<l>And in the van, the nectar of her lips,</l>
<l>Which you must taste, bring the battalia on,</l>
<l>Well-arm'd, and strongly lined with her discourse,</l>
<l>And knowing manners, to give entertainment;</l>
<l>Hippolytus himself would leave Diana,</l>
<l>To follow such a Venus.<note place='foot'>III., 1, 72.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The play which Massinger himself at one time esteemed
the most highly was <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>,<note place='foot'>See the Dedication: <q>I ever held this the most perfect birth
of my Minerva.</q> It was printed in 1629. It is interesting to
compare it with <hi rend='italic'>The Cardinal</hi>, for which Shirley had a similar
affection.</note> but we have to
remember that much of his best work was done after 1626,
the date of the play. <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>, though most
admirable, is strong and hard rather than inspired. More
than any other of his works it shows us an element of
greatness in the author's mind, which reveals itself in
many ways; in the attractive and noble character of
Paris, in the mastery shown in dealing with a Roman
theme, the local colour of which is put on with a light
and yet sure hand, in the skill with which the story is invested
with the atmosphere of tyranny, in the breathless
interest with which we follow the last moments of Domitian
in Act V., in the dexterity with which three smaller
plays are introduced into the action without in the least
confusing the construction. In making an actor the hero
of the play, and in giving him so many opportunities of
showing his art, Massinger no doubt felt every confidence
in the genius of J. Taylor, but perhaps the chief charm of
the play is due to the reflection which it inspires in the
mind of the reader, that it expresses with fire and conviction
the struggling author's high ideal for the theatre
as a social institution, and his esteem for actors. On the
other hand, there is little comic relief, and little female
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
interest beyond the infatuation of the Empress. Indeed,
the women who take part in the play are one and all unattractive,
and though it might be fairly urged that they
are probably adequate portraits of the originals, we cannot
help feeling that the author ought to have seen that
they were timid sketches. In other words, we are face to
face here with an acknowledged limitation of Massinger's
art. Nor should it be forgotten that while the play is
full of noble and even impassioned rhetoric,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Domitian's speech in II., 1, 160-168; and that of
Rusticus in III., 2, 59-68.</note> there are one
or two prosy passages<note place='foot'>As, for instance, Paris' speech in I., 1, 21-26, and
Stephanos' words in V., 1, 99-101.</note> and several small improbabilities.<note place='foot'>I., 4, where the Imperial princesses push one another about
in seeking for a front place in the street as Domitian passes,
is an example of this fault. We have already referred to the
difficulties which are involved in the infliction of torture on
the stage, as in III., 2. Again, it is improbable that the actors
should have been waiting, as in IV., 1, outside the private
gardens, ready to perform the very play which suited Domitian's
purpose. We are also disconcerted to find the ghosts in Act
V., 1, stealing the bust of Minerva. (<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>, however, Virgil
<hi rend='italic'>Æneid</hi>, II., 294.)</note>
In the third of the inserted plays Domitian, taking the
part of an actor, avenges himself on Paris. This device by
which characters in a play avenge themselves by taking
parts in a subordinate play, occurs in the famous <hi rend='italic'>Spanish
Tragedy</hi> of Kyd, and in Middleton's <hi rend='italic'>Women, beware
Women</hi>. Most successful of all is the splendid climax of
Act IV., where we have the clash of interest required by
the highest form of tragedy; we sympathize with Paris,
and yet we feel that the Emperor, who has been wronged,
must avenge himself signally and at once.
</p>

<p>
It is the tragi-comedies which give me the most pleasure,
the romantic plays with a happy ending, such as
<hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The
Bashful Lover</hi> (the last of Massinger's plays which we
possess), <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>; closely allied with these is <hi rend='italic'>The
Maid of Honour</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi> is full of
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
courtesy and grace; there are some charming passages
of poetry, and the metre is liquid and easy. The whole
play is bathed in the sunshine of youth, and while there
is some good comedy in it, there is little for the expurgator
to do. The characters are all drawn with skill and propriety,
especially the Duke, the Duchess of Urbin, and
Lidia. Petronella in disguise is Massinger's best comic
creation.
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>, with a trivial plot and some
improbability in details, there is much admirable work,
especially at the beginning. The two courtiers get to the
point at once, mentioning Pulcheria in I., 1, 10. It was
a play at which the author worked hard, and of which he
thought highly.<note place='foot'><p>Prologue 2, 7:
</p>
<p>
In each part,<lb/>
With his best of fancy, judgment, language, art,<lb/>
Fashion'd and form'd so, as might well, and may<lb/>
Deserve a welcome, and no vulgar way.
</p></note> The two good women, the sister and the
wife, are well drawn, and we understand how natural it
is that they should be antipathetic; we welcome the allowance
they make for one another,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> IV., 1, 28, and IV., 5, 216.</note> we sympathize with the
humiliation of each in her turn, and we rejoice in their
reconciliation. Especially pleasing are the gentle dignity
of Eudocia in III., 4, and her slowness to take up Chrysapius'
suggestion in IV., 1. The Emperor is not an attractive
character, as he is at once weak and violent; but we
have to remember that he is very young, and also that he
has been kept in leading-strings all the earlier part of his
life. I should like to believe, with many critics, that the
prose scene, in which the Empiric figures, is not due to
Massinger. It is a study in the manner of Ben Jonson.
Another touch of the older master is <q>The Projector,</q><note place='foot'>I., 2.</note> who
is, however, on very much fainter lines than Meercroft in
<hi rend='italic'>The Devil is an Ass</hi>. Imitation of Shakspere is prominent
in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>. Scenes I., 1, and III., 1, remind
us of Henry VIII's courtiers. The pictures in Act II.
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
seem to be suggested by a similar scene in <hi rend='italic'>The Merchant
of Venice</hi>. Act IV., 5 recalls <hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, III., 4; Act V., 2,
105-8 is modelled on <hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi> III., 3, 330-3.<note place='foot'>The way in which the apple circulates reminds us of the
Umbrana in Beaumont's amusing <hi rend='italic'>Woman-Hater</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>The Prince of Tarent</hi> is based, as
the Prologue tells us, on an old play; the author's modesty
cannot forbear saying that, good as it was before, it is
<q>much better'd now.</q> By this he probably means that
substantial additions have been made, that the plot has
been put into better shape,<note place='foot'>The reference to an architect in IV., 2, 178, suggests
that in the first draft of the play Paulo had appeared in that
character.</note> and that perhaps the comic
element is cut down. Boyle assigns about two-fifths of
the play to Massinger, including the quarrel between
Cardenes and Antonio, and the great love scene between
Antonio and Almira, but excluding the careful treatment
of Cardenes' melancholy by Paulo the doctor.<note place='foot'>IV., 2.</note> I should
myself unhesitatingly assign the latter scene to Massinger.
The only scenes which can be safely attributed to Fletcher
are those of the slave-market,<note place='foot'>III., 1.</note> and that where Leonora
seeks to console Almira.<note place='foot'>III., 4.</note> The sprightly vivacity of
the former and the tenderness of the latter are good
evidence for this assignation. A perusal of this admirable
masterpiece leads us to the conclusion that if Massinger,
instead of collaborating with Fletcher, had rewritten the
plays of the latter, our literature would have been greatly
enriched.
</p>

<p>
I would not deny that a man may have several styles,
and may write in the manner of another; especially is this
possible when the other has been his bosom friend. Still
there are a grace and delicacy about <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi> which
seem to suggest the hand of Fletcher. The characters
are drawn with great refinement and vividness. There
is a pair of devoted friends, Antonio and Pedro, and over
against them two charming ladies, Leonora and Almira,
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
the former at once sensible and kind, the latter almost
worthy of a place beside Shakspere's heroines. The great
love scene, though suggested by Desdemona and Othello,
is not unworthy of Shakspere himself.<note place='foot'>IV., 3.</note> Cuculo is an
amusing study of the old courtier, such as we get elsewhere
in Massinger. Borachia, the lady who loves wine, is
drawn with a lighter hand than Massinger's; yet I feel
that Fletcher, unassisted or unpruned, would have made
the scenes in which she appears grosser than they are.
Antonio, the Prince of Tarent, reminds us of a clean-limbed,
honest English public-school boy; he is slow to
take offence, but brave when provoked, sorry for the mischance
of which he is the innocent cause, courteous, and
ready on all occasions.
</p>

<p>
The plot has been shaped with great attention to detail.
Thus, when Antonio, disguised as a slave, first meets his
friend Pedro, his master Cuculo does not allow him to
speak,<note place='foot'>III., 2, 69.</note> so that Pedro has no chance of identifying him
by his voice. Later on, however, Pedro has an intuition
that the slave is other than he seems to be:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>I do see something in this fellow's face still</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>That ties my heart fast to him.</q><note place='foot'>IV., 1, 17.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
He treats him as a friend, as though his intuition pierced
through the external disguise,<note place='foot'>IV., 3, 196; V., 3, 53.</note> and when the recognition
takes place he naturally remarks:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Have I not just cause,</q></l>
<l>When I consider how I could be so stupid,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>As not to see a friend through all disguises.</q><note place='foot'>V., 5, 42.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Again, we have an indication at the end of the slave-market
scene that the slave who followed Paulo will be
an important link in the plot:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Paulo.</hi>   Follow me, then;</l>
<l>The knave may teach me something.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Slave.</hi>               Something that</l>
<l>You dearly may repent; howe'er you scorn me,</l>
<l>The slave may prove your master.<note place='foot'>III., 1, 162.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It is this slave who leads the pirates in their attempt to
carry off Leonora and Almira.
</p>

<p>
When Antonio appears in his former dress<note place='foot'>V., 5.</note> we ask, how
did he get it? The answer is, from the Captain, his fellow-slave,
whose life he had saved in the past by interceding
with the Viceroy.<note place='foot'>II., 1, 35.</note> Lastly, the Duke's reference (V., 2,
130) to the advice which the Viceroy had given him in
II., 2, is one of those careful touches making for unity
of design in which Massinger delights.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>, I., 1, 405 and V., 2, 4.</note>
</p>

<p>
No doubt the plot is not free from improbabilities; in
real life Antonio would have revealed himself to Pedro,
and Pedro and Almira would both have recognized him.
We have already seen that Massinger is so fond of a story
that he sometimes forgets to let his characters guide it.
To round off the play harmoniously, Antonio should have
had a soliloquy, to explain to the audience who he was,
to lament over the change of his fortunes, to express a
hope that all would come right in the end, to reassert his
devotion to Pedro, and to protest his loyalty in spite of
everything to Almira. Perhaps something of the sort
was cut out.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi> is the last play of <q>the strange old
fellow</q><note place='foot'>Epilogue, line 9.</note> that we possess; it reminds us in several respects
of Fletcher; in the romantic atmosphere,<note place='foot'>There is too much kneeling in this play; Hortensio kneels,
I., 1, 200; Matilda, III., 3, 60 and 123; Lorenzo, IV., 1, 167;
Matilda again, IV., 1, 184; Alonzo and Pisano, V., 1, 180;
Matilda again, V., 3, 101; the Ambassador, V., 3, 169.</note> the overwrought
devotion of the hero, the bustling action and the
complexity of the plot, and in a metrical detail.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, the <q>emphatic</q> double ending. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> II., 4, 21; II.,
6, 51; II., 7, 69: III., 1, 114; IV., 3, 81; IV, 3, 155.</note> On the
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
other hand, the smooth and careful construction, the subordination
of the comedy, the constant use of parentheses,
and, above all, the vacillations of the violent Lorenzo,
are characteristics of Massinger. There are many noble
personages in the play, and considerable tenderness.
Matilda's character is drawn well at the start; in the latter
part she rather tends to become a lay figure. A princess
with three aspirants to her hand, of whom two are princes,
while the one she loves is to all appearance of lowly birth,
is awkwardly placed. The same fault, as Boyle points out,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>N. S. S.</hi>, p. 393.</note>
might be found with the hero, Hortensio; the fact is that
the story rather carries the characters along in its sweep
than is developed by them; moreover, Massinger seems
in the last two acts to be more interested in the psychological
study of Lorenzo's emotions than in his hero's
fortunes. With all its beauties, the play betrays the advancing
years of the author by a certain heaviness of touch,
although the episode of Ascanio, the disguised page, is
carried through with great delicacy and skill, and the
varied incidents of Act II. make the battle one of the
most lifelike in literature.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi> is well planned, and the characters
well contrasted. Indeed, anyone who doubts Massinger's
skill in this respect will be convinced by this play. Though
the end is sombre, it is, as Leslie Stephen has pointed out,
dignified and inevitable. As Bertoldo was sworn to celibacy,
Camiola could not have married him, even if her
self-respect had allowed it.<note place='foot'>The disappointment which we feel at Camiola's lot may be
paralleled by Bellario in <hi rend='italic'>Philaster</hi>.</note> Here again we get an imperious
lady, the Duchess Aurelia, who changes her mind
too rapidly, but cannot be charged with viciousness.
The comic touches, a foolish lover and a pair of effeminate
courtiers, are quite good. The various moods of Adorni&mdash;his
deepening devotion to Camiola, his humility at her
rebuke, his fidelity in doing her commands, his temptation
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
to commit suicide&mdash;are admirably portrayed. The
King, too, is well drawn; he is a complex character, who
is not wholly bad. The rough old soldier Gonzaga is a
lifelike study, but the figure who dominates the play is
the high-spirited and beautiful heroine. The careful
skill of the author is shown in many details, among others,
in the way in which Camiola, before taking the veil,
persuades the King to forgive Fulgentio. For this to
be possible the way is paved by the King's change of mind
as to Camiola's character in IV., 5. The end of the play
shows in what way Massinger is a greater artist than
Fletcher. The latter would certainly have married off
the Duchess Aurelia to the King or the Duke of Urbin,
and provided Gonzaga with a wife.
</p>

<p>
No student of our comic drama can ignore the brilliant
vigour of <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi> was printed in 1658. Perhaps this
accounts for Colley Gibber's statement that Massinger died in
1659. The editor of the play, Andrew Pennycuicke, <q>one of
the actors,</q> being, as the name would seem to imply, a canny
Scot, dedicated the first edition <q>to the truly noble John North
Esquire,</q> and the second, <hi rend='italic'>totidem verbis</hi>, <q>to the truly noble
and virtuous Lady Anne, Countess of Oxford.</q> I owe this
fact to the kindness of Mr. P. Simpson. It is to be noted
that both editions read <q>out-conquered,</q> whereas Cunningham
has printed <q>not-conquered.</q></note> The characters one and all
contribute to an harmonious unity, the most lifelike
perhaps being Sir John Frugal, the bluff, successful British
merchant, tender-hearted, yet ashamed of being unbusinesslike,
and a good judge of men. The plot moves
easily, not overloaded with satire. The women remind
us of Ben Jonson's women, but with less strength there is
a greater art shown here than Ben Jonson had at his command.
The great triumph of the play is the hypocrite
Luke, to whom some splendid rhetoric is assigned. He
arrests our attention from the first; though not on the
grand scale like Sir Giles Overreach, he is an innate villain,
who only lacks opportunity to be capable of anything,
a sordid soul, who does not know what goodness is. The
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
two 'prentices are of the same kidney as Quicksilver in
<hi rend='italic'>Eastward Ho</hi>.
</p>

<p>
For sheer vitality and strength three of the plays stand
out conspicuously: <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The
Guardian</hi>. Though they are disfigured by one or two
coarse scenes, one is carried along in reading them as if one
were in a sailing-boat, dancing along a fresh sea. Of <hi rend='italic'>The
Bondman</hi> Monck Mason says: <q>I don't recollect any play
whatsoever that begins or ends in a manner so pleasing,
uncommon, and striking.</q> It contains four well-drawn
characters&mdash;Timoleon, Marullo, Leosthenes, and Cleora.
The plot is lively, though some critics, I think unjustly,
have accused the author of cutting the knot in the fifth
act. The disguised brother and sister who meet in Act
III., I should perhaps indicate their relationship. Timandra
does not explicitly mention her brother till V., 1,
64. A reference earlier in the play to the wrong which
Leosthenes had done her would certainly make for clearness.
There is much fine eloquence in the play. The
one or two offensive comic scenes are not essential to
the plot.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi> has an Oriental setting, which alone would
make it attractive on the stage. The character of Donusa
is on the grand scale, one of Massinger's successes; the
Merchant, the Jesuit, and Grimaldi are all well drawn.
There is some fine oratory and a good plot, which works
up to an exciting end. There is not much in the comic
line of value here.
</p>

<p>
The plot of <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi> is more complicated than is
usual with Massinger. It contains some charming banditti
scenes, while Alphonso's fictitious narrative in the
last act is one of the strongest pieces of writing in our
author. The guardian, Durazzo, the kind-hearted but
cynical and quick-tempered old man of the world, is one
of Massinger's most successful creations. On the other
hand, it will be allowed that there is too much concession
in <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi> to a corrupt taste, due perhaps to poverty
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
and the depression of failure. The character of Iolante
is unattractive; her intrigue with a man who turns out
to be her brother is odious; her repentance is cheap and
unconvincing. The earlier part of the play in its movement
and morals alike reminds us of Fletcher.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi> is full of power, and enriched with some
good strokes of satire; the alternations of mood in the
chief characters are represented with skill, while the magic
portrait on which the plot hinges seems to take a natural
place in the story. There is, however, a crudeness and
hardness of texture about the play, though Mathias and
Sophia are well drawn, especially the latter. Everything
comes right at the last, and true love is vindicated
after the display of some proper pride; but one feels
that the three venture their honour too far. <q>He comes
too near who comes to be denied.</q> The King's faults
are overdrawn; the Queen very nearly spoils the play;
the young courtiers, though realistic, are unpleasant;
the comic element is poor and farcical.<note place='foot'>Hilario is Massinger's one attempt at the Shaksperian
<q>fool</q>; but what a contrast there is between Hilario and
Touchstone or Feste!</note> In dealing with
a psychological theme, Massinger was trying to adjust to
the hard-and-fast concrete outlines of the drama a story
which would have been easier to manage and more attractive
to read if it had been cast in the form of a novel.
There would then have been possible gradations of light
and shade, which would have made the treatment less
bald. It would have supplied Richardson with a
problem worthy of his heart-breaking and long-drawn
analysis.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi> is a gloomy play, with a somewhat
intricate plot, presenting to us that strange <q>Italianate</q><note place='foot'>Dekker's word.</note>
world of treachery and poison with which Webster, Ford,
and Tourneur make us familiar. We must remember, on
the other hand, that Italy gives an atmosphere which
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
domestic plays like <hi rend='italic'>The Yorkshire Tragedy</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Arden of
Feversham</hi> lack. As in <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural
Combat</hi>, the plot is developed late, though hints are given
before. Thus, the ill-treated sister is early referred to,<note place='foot'>II., 1, 20.</note>
while the last words of the same act prepare us for
Francisco's villainy. The finest scene in the play is Act
III., 1, which is bathed in the romantic atmosphere so
congenial to our author. Sforza submits to his enemy,
the Emperor Charles, without forfeiting our esteem,
while the Emperor shows a noble magnanimity. There
is a subdued comic element in the person of Graccho, the
musician.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi> is carefully written<note place='foot'>Notice the skill with which Sforza, in I., 3, works up to his
unexpected and terrible request.</note> and skilfully
constructed; the author has taken great pains to draw the
characters of Sforza and Marcelia, though Francisco is
perhaps more successful than either.<note place='foot'>A clever passage is that where Francisco points out that
nothing succeeds like success (IV., 1, 16-36).</note> The Duke's last
words are the clue to his character:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>I come: Death, I obey thee!</l>
<l>Yet I will not die raging; for alas!</l>
<l>My whole life was a frenzy: good Eugenia,</l>
<l>In death forgive me.<note place='foot'><p>V., 2, 256. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> IV., 2, 75:
</p>
<p>
Hold but thy nature, Duke, and be but rash,<lb/>
And violent enough.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also I., 2, 30; I., 3, 369; III., 3, 252.</p></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The chief <q>frenzy</q> of his life was his devotion to his
wife Marcelia. This peerless beauty combines pride<note place='foot'>I., 1, 111-125.</note>
with a kindly simplicity which is no match for Francisco;
while she dearly loves her husband and forgives him
in her last words, she is not altogether attractive. On the
other hand, her anger with Sforza for leaving orders that
she should be killed if he did not return safe from his
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
hazardous enterprise is natural, and the scene in which
she receives him coldly and provokes his violent anger
would be effective when acted.<note place='foot'>III., 3.</note> We are inevitably reminded
of <hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, and the comparison is most instructive
as revealing the great gap which separates the pupil from
the master. Marcelia is not so gracious as Desdemona,
nor Sforza so strong as Othello, nor Francisco so devilish
as Iago. As is usually the case with Massinger, the fifth
act carries along our interest to the end. We do not weep,
but we are certainly moved by the horror of the Duke's
death. The princesses of the Ducal House are responsible
for an improbable scene<note place='foot'>II., 1, 121.</note> when they flout Marcelia in the
absence of her lord. Their behaviour reminds us of
the ladies in <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>. In style <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of
Milan</hi> is marked by several passages of fine poetry and
a comparative absence of the parenthetic construction.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi> is a famous and much-admired play,
adapted by Nicholas Rowe in the eighteenth century
to form the basis of his <hi rend='italic'>Fair Penitent</hi>.<note place='foot'>Though Rowe behaved badly in concealing his theft from
Massinger, the critics have been unfair to his play. It is very
instructive to compare the simple structure of <hi rend='italic'>The Fair Penitent</hi>,
written on French lines, with the larger scheme and wealth
of incident in <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>. We are reminded of the contrast
between an English and a Dutch garden. After all, some
people prefer their yew-trees cut into cocks and hens, while
others do not. I can imagine a being who would prefer
Gounod's <hi rend='italic'>Romeo and Juliet</hi> to Shakspere's. In <hi rend='italic'>The Fair
Penitent</hi>, the law-court scene, the father's funeral, and the
music-master disappear. We get the <q>gay Lothario</q> from
this once popular play. Mr. Phelan (p. 60) has properly
pointed out that <q>for Lothario we entertain a latent regard,
for his elegant and gallant bearing,</q> whereas Novall, junr.,
<q>is not calculated to gain love.</q> In other words, while
Massinger's moral is superior, Rowe is more true to life. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
some interesting remarks by Hazlitt (<hi rend='italic'>Dramatic Essays</hi>, pp. 93-95)
on Rowe's play and Miss O'Neill as Calista.</note> There are some
fine scenes here, notably the funeral, which is as effective
as anything our poet has written. On the other hand,
the scene in which Rochfort is robed and blindfolded, and
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
assents to his daughter's death, recalls Fletcher in its
improbability; nor is it likely that Beaumelle would marry
Charalois at such short notice. All we can say about this
is that hurried weddings are one of the presuppositions
of the Jacobean drama.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, III., 2, 144, and Fletcher, <hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note> There are an heroic atmosphere,
a fine friendship, and much rhetoric of a high order in <hi rend='italic'>The
Fatal Dowry</hi>. Moreover, as the moral lines at the end
point out, there is the clash of law and natural vengeance
in this play, which is a legitimate source of dramatic
power. Charalois, Romont, Malotin, and Pontalier are
all well drawn: the <q>sweet and gentle nature</q> of Charalois
is particularly attractive, though he is not incapable
of passionate anger,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> I., 1, 203.</note> which makes the punishment he
inflicts on his guilty wife in IV., 4 more credible. On the
other hand, a story is at a disadvantage in which the
father, though generous and dignified, is impulsive and
quixotic, the heroine is worthless, and her lover contemptible.<note place='foot'>Novall never meant to marry Beaumelle. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> IV., 1,
100; V., 2, 264.</note>
The style in places is less lucid than usual, which
may be due to the co-operation of Field; moreover, the
metre is more halting than Massinger's is wont to be, and
I think it probable that the play has been carelessly
printed. There is much spirited sarcasm in Act III., and
some fun in Act IV.<note place='foot'>For a discussion of the authorship of the play, see <ref target='Appendix_XI'>Appendix
XI</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi> is full of splendid rhetoric;
indeed, there are perhaps too many soliloquies. This
early work is grim as an iron-bound coast; yet the
affairs of the honest, brave, and poverty-stricken
captain, Belgarde, provide a lighter element, and the
moralizing of the pert page in III., 2 is both sensible
and light-handed in execution. The reason for the son's
antipathy to his father is hinted at from time to time in the
first act; its disclosure is postponed too late. We should
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
also have been prepared for the wrongs and treachery
of Montreville, which burst upon us too suddenly in the
last act. The evil passion of Malefort is powerfully
depicted; here, again, we have a careful study of conflicting
emotions. Though he struggles against his evil
desires, we feel that a bad man must come to a bad end.<note place='foot'>There is much in Act III. of <hi rend='italic'>A King and No King</hi> which
reminds us of Malefort's passion; but Massinger is a better
moralist than the authors of that brilliant play.</note>
The play would have been better rounded off if in the
initial part some indication had been given that he
seemed to everyone a man whose mind, for some mysterious
reason, was unbalanced and unhinged.<note place='foot'>Beaufort senior's words in III., 2, 32-41, should, however,
be carefully observed.</note> Once allow that
such a theme can be tolerable as that which we have here,
and the hints which Montreville drops from time to time
are adequate to stir the suspicion of the spectator.
</p>

<p>
The style is more like rhythmical prose than that of any
other of Massinger's plays. Here alone in our author
do children occur, and that in an unpleasing context.<note place='foot'>IV., 2, 87. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>, however, Sir John Van Olden Barnavelt,
III., 2.</note>
The ghosts of Malefort's victims, which appear in the last
scene, seem to me a legitimate and powerful episode.
It was natural to compare this violent play with Chapman's
tragedies; Malefort reminding us of <hi rend='italic'>Bussy d'Ambois</hi>
and Byron; but there is little in common between the
two authors. In the first place, Massinger knows how to
construct a play; in the second place, there is hardly a
line in <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi> which is obscure, whereas
in the last act of <hi rend='italic'>Bussy d'Ambois</hi>, Chapman's masterpiece,
there is hardly a line which is intelligible.
</p>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi> contains much fine poetry<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>E.g.</hi>, Charles's speech about Cupid, V., 1, 33-60.</note>
and one great forensic scene, such as our author loves.<note place='foot'>Act V. We must allow that Cleremond and Leonora
are too long-winded.</note>
It is, however, in too fragmentary a state for us to judge
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
it fairly.<note place='foot'>We may conjecture that the missing part of Act I. contained
(<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>) a scene in which <q>three citizens</q> described the
situation, and the absence of the King; (<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) a scene of love-making
between Cleremond and Leonora, containing the incident
referred to in II., 2, 93-100; (<hi rend='italic'>c</hi>) a scene in which Beaupré
obtained Chamont's protection, and asked for an introduction
to Bellisant (<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> V., 1, 470). Bellisant may also have appeared
before I., 4, as her denunciations of the gallants are referred
to in II., 1, 23. And Bellisant knows in III., 3, 145, that Clarindore
had <q>cast off</q> Beaupré. Clarindore is the sort of man
who might have boasted of this.</note> The atmosphere is unreal, the interest flags,
the boisterous comedy is unattractive. There are more
women than is usual in Massinger, and duelling and friendship
inspire two noble scenes (III., 2; IV., 2). Though
vice is humbled, we ask here, as in <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, does
virtue gain by the way in which its opposite is portrayed?
And are not the characters, male and female alike, undiscriminated?
The interest, in other words, is concentrated
in the triple story, and doubtless we feel some satisfaction
in the punishment of Clarindore, the betrayer of
secrets.<note place='foot'>V., 1, 520. Massinger did not like people who cannot keep
a secret. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, IV., 2, 142.</note> There are a good many half-lines in the manner
of Fletcher.
</p>

<p>
Though <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi><note place='foot'>For a fuller discussion of this play and the MS., see
Appendixes <ref target='Appendix_VII'>VII.</ref> and <ref target='Appendix_VIII'>VIII.</ref></note> is full of dignity and poetry,
it has a plot without much nexus, of the sort which
Aristotle would blame as ἐπεισοδιώδης.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Poetics</hi>, 1451<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>, 16, 1451<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, 34.</note> We are wafted
from Carthage to Bithynia, from Bithynia to Lusitania,
from Lusitania to Sicily. Though Antiochus is truly
a king even in his misfortunes, and excites our respect
and compassion, the play can hardly have been a success.
The melancholy tinge is too uniform; the improbabilities
of the recognitions are too glaring. The Courtesan and
Berecinthius cannot be said to have added to the gaiety
of nations; of the other characters Flaminius alone has
individuality. The peculiar circumstances under which
the play was written may help to explain the fiasco.
</p>

<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Old Law</hi> does not owe much to Massinger. As it
was a favourite play, it may have owed its association with
his name to revision on his part.<note place='foot'><p>Touches which remind one of Massinger occur, but they
are few and far between&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>:
</p>
<p>
I., 1, 30-70, reminds us of him here and there. (The same
applies to Cleanthes' speech, I., 1, 323-345.)
</p>
<p>
I., 1, 248: <q>personal opposition.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>,
IV., 2, 98.)
</p>
<p>
I., 1,362:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Cleanthes.</hi> How do you fare, sir?
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Leonides.</hi> Cleanthes, never better.
</p>
<p>
(In the <hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi> manner.)
</p>
<p>
II., 1, 41-61: The first courtier's speech.
</p>
<p>
II., 2, 73-94: Lysander's speech.
</p>
<p>
IV., 2, 1-130: see especially lines 3, 41, 72, 109.
</p>
<p>
V., 1, 54-82.
</p>
<p>
V., 1, 119-132: Lysander's speech.
</p>
<p>
V., 1, 156-175.
</p>
<p>
V., 1, 232-250: Cleanthes' speech. (Notice the parenthesis in
lines 246-7.)
</p>
<p>
The play is usually assigned to 1599, on the strength of the
passage where Gnotho gets the clerk to alter the Parish
Chronicle (III., 1). Gayley thinks the mention of 1599
<q>purely dramatic</q> (<hi rend='italic'>R. E. C.</hi>, III., p. lv). He says the style
is not like that of Middleton in 1599, and points out that
Rowley was only fourteen years of age in that year. <q>If
Massinger had any share in the play, it was in revision, after
Middleton's death in 1627.</q> Gayley dates the play 1614-16.
It must be pointed out, however, that it is not easy to alter
40 to 39. The author could have chosen a date whose figures
were more easy to deal with. I therefore think the usually
accepted date is right, though it does not, of course, settle the
question of authorship.
</p>
<p>
Massinger was fond of scenes in courts of justice, and it is
highly probable that he elaborated the details of Act V.</p></note> There is a charming
tenderness in places and a rollicking improbability about
the whole scheme, both alien to the staid Massinger.
The humour is not his, but better; his phraseology is
markedly absent;<note place='foot'>We find <q>horror</q> in IV., 2, 72 and 160; a certain number
of the alliterations referred to above (p. 121), I., 1, 66; II., 1,
210, 265; II., 2, 119; V., 1, 546, 550, 605, 650; and words
doubled (I., 1, 67, 88, 206, 220, 268, 354, 389; II., 1, 154, 275;
II., 2, 91; III., 1, 304, 363).</note> the prose scenes show another conception
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
of art; the careless metre suggests Rowley. It is
clear that whoever wrote the comic parts of <hi rend='italic'>The Old Law</hi>
was responsible for Chough, Trimtram, and the Roarers
in <hi rend='italic'>A Fair Quarrel</hi>. The scene is laid in <q>Epire,</q> a region
which seems to have been regarded by our ancestors as a
place for strange things to happen, and a vague background
like the city of Callipolis;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, IV., 1; <hi rend='italic'>Love's Triumph through
Callipolis</hi>; Peele's <hi rend='italic'>Battle of Alcazar</hi>.</note> it seems to have the
same character in the present day. A King of <q>Epire</q>
figures among Diocletian's court in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>,
and in <hi rend='italic'>The Dumb Knight</hi><note place='foot'>Dodsley's <hi rend='italic'>Old Plays</hi>, vol. x. (Hazlitt).</note> we find a Duke of Epire. The
classical allusions and Latin phrases suggest that the
author of <hi rend='italic'>The Old Law</hi> was a man of some culture.
</p>

<p>
My task is now ended. I shall consider myself happy
if I persuade some of my readers to make the acquaintance
of Massinger's plays.<note place='foot'>There is a good edition of <hi rend='italic'>A New Way to pay Old Debts</hi> by
K. Deighton (G. Bell, 1893). Brander Matthews has also
edited the play, prefixing a valuable estimate of the poet.</note> We have lately been celebrating
the tercentenary of Shakspere's death. The best
way of honouring a great author is to read his writings;
but to appreciate aright the greatness of Shakspere we
should be wise to combine with our study a just estimate
of his contemporaries and satellites; and, of the many
dramatists of that century, none seem to me more worthy
of affectionate consideration than Philip Massinger. It
is especially instructive to return to his writings from
the perusal of the masterpieces of his contemporaries;
though from time to time they display rich gifts of pathos,
poetry, and humour, they are too often marred by waywardness,
unnaturalness, want of proportion, and grossness;
it is a relief to resume the study of an author whose
work is sober, well balanced, dignified, and lucid. While
he shares with them the modern atmosphere of romance
and adventure, he is the most Greek of his generation;
and this is the real secret of his abiding charm. The
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
passionate, the abnormal, the lurid, the farcical elements,
in which his contemporaries revel, are not, indeed,
entirely absent, but they are less conspicuous; the
luxuriance of the thicket does not hinder the wayfarer
from following the path; we pluck the roses without
tearing our flesh on the thorns; and as we contemplate
the marble splendour of his verse we almost forget that
sculpture has its limitations.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix I. The Small Actor In Massinger's Plays</head>

<p>
There are several passages in our author in which reference
is made to the low stature of the actor of a female part.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, II., 1, 108: Graccho, speaking of Mariana:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Of a little thing,</l>
<l>It is so full of gall!</l>
</lg>

<p>
II., 1, 156:
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Marcelia.</hi> For you, puppet&mdash;</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Mariana.</hi> What of me, pine-tree?</l>
</lg>

<p>
172:
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Mariana.</hi> O that I could reach you,</l>
<l>The little one you scorn so.</l>
</lg>

<p>
177:
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Graccho.</hi>       Forty ducats</l>
<l>Upon the little hen.</l>
</lg>

<p>
181:
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Marcelia.</hi> Where are you,</l>
<l>You modicum, you dwarf?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Mariana.</hi> Here, giantess, here.</l>
</lg>

<p>
188:
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Mariana.</hi> Or right me on this monster (she's three foot</l>
<l>Too high for a woman).</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, I., 2, 3: Cleon, speaking to Corisca:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Beauty invites temptations, and short heels</l>
<l>Are soon tripp'd up.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(This passage may have another interpretation.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Renegado</hi>, I., 2, 9: Manto, speaking of Paulina:
</p>

<lg>
<l>And though low of stature,</l>
<l>Her well-proportion'd limbs invite affection.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<p>
II., 5, 159: Asambeg, of Paulina:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Such a spirit,</l>
<l>In such a small proportion, I ne'er read of.</l>
</lg>

<p>
V., 2, 62: Carazie, of Paulina:
</p>

<lg>
<l>I would he had sent me</l>
<l>To the gallies or the gallows, when he gave me</l>
<l>To this proud little devil.</l>
</lg>

<p>
V., 3, 174: Mustapha, of Paulina:
</p>

<lg>
<l>A terrible little tyranness!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1, 86: Perigot, of Leonora:
</p>

<lg>
<l>A confident little pleader.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, IV., 1, 15: Domitilla, referring to Domitia:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 28'>Who no sooner absent.</l>
<l>But she calls Dwarf! (so in her scorn she styles me)</l>
<l>Put on my pantofles, fetch pen and paper.</l>
</lg>

<p>
V., 2, 5: Domitilla speaks:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Could I make my approaches, though my stature</l>
<l>Does promise little, I have a spirit as daring</l>
<l>As hers that can reach higher.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 1, 96: Corisca speaks:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Your hand, or if you please</l>
<l>To have me fight so high, I'll not be coy,</l>
<l>But stand a-tiptoe for't.</l>
</lg>

<p>
III., 2, 27: Ricardo to Corisca:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Pretty one, I descend</l>
<l>To take the height of your lip.</l>
</lg>

<p>
II., 2, 197: And Pallas, bound up in a little volume.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, II., 1, 388: Theodosius to Athenais:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 42'>By thyself,</l>
<l>The magazine of felicity, in thy lowness</l>
<l>Our eastern queens, at their full height, bow to thee.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, I., 2, 46: Sylli to Camiola:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Nor I, your little ladyship, till you have</l>
<l>Perform'd the covenants.</l>
</lg>

<p>
II., 2, 117: Fulgentio to Camiola:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Of a little thing</l>
<l>You are a pretty peat, indifferent fair too.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, IV., 3, 83:
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Bertoldo.</hi> Since she alone, in the abstract of herself,</l>
<l>That small but ravishing substance, comprehends</l>
<l>Whatever is, or can be wish'd, in the</l>
<l>Idea of a woman!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, I., 1, 116:
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Hortensio.</hi> My little friend, good morrow.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> III., 1, 28, where <q>Ascanio</q> has to be carried.)
</p>
</quote>

<p>
The part of Domitilla was taken by I. Hunniman; that of
Paulina by Theo. Bourne; that of Corisca (in <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>) by
W. Trigge. It would appear, therefore, that these references
are not all due to the stature of any one individual actor,
but that Massinger took care to have actors of different height
brought into juxtaposition in his plays. He may here be
copying the well-known passages in <hi rend='italic'>Midsummer Night's
Dream</hi> (III., 2, 288-298, 324, 329). <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Antony and
Cleopatra</hi>, II., 5, 118; III., 3, 13; <hi rend='italic'>Much Ado</hi>, I., 1, 172 and
216; <hi rend='italic'>As You Like It</hi>, I., 2, 284; <hi rend='italic'>Twelfth Night</hi>, I., 5, 219; II.,
5, 16; <hi rend='italic'>King Lear</hi>, I., 1, 201. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Bradley's <hi rend='italic'>Shakspearean
Tragedy</hi>, p. 317, n. 1.
</p>

<p>
In Dekker's <hi rend='italic'>Honest Whore</hi>, Pt. 2. III., 1, the heroine,
Bellafront, is <q>a little tiny woman.</q> So are Pretiosa in Middleton's
<hi rend='italic'>Spanish Gipsy</hi> (I., 5), and Isabella in <hi rend='italic'>Women, beware
Women</hi> (III., 2). <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>The Case is Altered</hi> (III., 3), <q>'Fore
God, the taller is a gallant lady.</q> We find the same idea in <hi rend='italic'>The
Fair Maid of the West</hi>, II., 3; III., 1, 2. Celestina, in Shirley's
<hi rend='italic'>Lady of Pleasure</hi> (III., 2), is <q>a puppet.</q> Spaconia in <hi rend='italic'>A King
and no King</hi> (III., 1) is <q>that little one</q>; Viola in <hi rend='italic'>The Coxcomb</hi>
(V., 3) is <q>not high.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>The Prophetess</hi> (I., 3, 59),
a play which bears many marks of Massinger's work:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Dioclesian.</hi> Thou know'st she is a prophetess.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Maximinian.</hi> A small one,</l>
<l>And as small profit to be hoped for by her.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Spanish Curate</hi> (V., 1, 37), Jamie to Violante:
</p>

<lg>
<l>In stature you're a giantess: and your tailor</l>
<l>Takes measures of you with a Jacob's staff</l>
<l>Or he can never reach you: this by the way</l>
<l>For your large size.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Love's Cure</hi> (V., 3), Bobadillo to Lucio, speaking about Clara:
</p>

<lg>
<l>I put the longest weapon in your sister's hand, my lord, because she was the shortest lady.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Sea Voyage</hi> (IV., 3): <hi rend='smallcaps'>Morillat</hi>: <q>This little gentlewoman
that was taken with us,</q> referring to Aminta. As Cleopatra
in <hi rend='italic'>The False One</hi> (II., 3) arrives in a parcel, she must have
been small. Margarita in <hi rend='italic'>Rule a Wife</hi> (III., 4) is <q>of a low
stature.</q> Ismenia in <hi rend='italic'>The Maid of the Mill</hi> <q>was of the lowest
stature</q> (I., 2); <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> also V., 2, 7. Evanthe in <hi rend='italic'>A Wife for a
Month</hi>, IV., 3 is <q>this little fort.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>The Noble
Gentleman</hi>, IV., 3.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_II'/>
<head>Appendix II</head>

<p>
Did Massinger know Greek? It is perhaps worth while
collecting the scanty evidence on the subject. We find a pun
on the name Philanax in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>,<note place='foot'><p>V., 3, 148:
</p>
<p>
O Philanax, as thy name<lb/>
Interpreted speaks thee, thou hast ever been<lb/>
A lover of the King.
</p></note> and Mathias
plays on the name of his wife Sophia.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 1, 6.</note> The phrase κατ᾽
ἐξοήν is used in <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>.<note place='foot'><p>III., 1, 7. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Ben Jonson's <hi rend='italic'>Staple of News</hi>, IV., 4
Pennyboy junior:
</p>
<p>
Thou appears't<lb/>
κατ᾽ ἐξοχήν, a canter.
</p></note> We find a Greek construction
in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>:<note place='foot'>III., 1, 102-3.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And that before he gives he would consider</l>
<l>The what, to whom, and wherefore.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On the other hand, we notice Theseus scanned as a trisyllable.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, II., 1, 278 and 294.</note>
</p>

<p>
There are one or two passages where the unexpected turn
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
of the thought rather suggests a Greek original. Thus, in
<hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi><note place='foot'>III., 4, 40.</note> we are reminded of <hi rend='italic'>The Acharnians</hi>:<note place='foot'>σκάνδικά μοι δός, μητρόθεν δεδεγμένος. (l. 478).</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gazet.</hi> What places of credit are there?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Carazie.</hi> Chief gardener.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Gazet.</hi> Out upon't! 'Twill put me in mind my mother was an herb woman.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Another passage of <hi rend='smallcaps'>The Renegado</hi><note place='foot'>II., 5, 96.</note> reminds us of a famous
fragment of Euripides,<note place='foot'><p>Telephus frag., 722:
</p>
<p>
Σπάρταν ἔλαχες, κείνην κόσμει;<lb/>
τὰς δὲ Μυκήνας ἡμεῖς ἰδίᾳ.
</p></note> often mistranslated:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Asambeg.</hi>                          At Aleppo</l>
<l>I durst not press you so far: give me leave</l>
<l>To use my own will and command in Tunis.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi><note place='foot'>V., 1, 5.</note> we find a parallel to <hi rend='italic'>The Hecuba</hi>:<note place='foot'>ὡς γραφεύς τ᾽ ἀποσταθείς.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Theophilus.</hi>            As a curious painter,</l>
<l>When he has made some honourable piece,</l>
<l>Stands off, and with a searching eye examines</l>
<l>Each colour, how 'tis sweeten'd; and then hugs</l>
<l>Himself for his rare workmanship.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi><note place='foot'>IV., 5, 61.</note> occurs a parallel quoted by Dr.
Walter Headlam in his notes to <hi rend='italic'>Agamemnon</hi>:<note place='foot'>ἐπὶ δὲ καρδίαν ἔδραμε κροκοβαφὴς σταγών (l. 1121).</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Theodosius.</hi>       What an earthquake I feel in me!</l>
<l>And on the sudden my whole fabric totters!</l>
<l>My blood within me turns, and through my veins,</l>
<l>Parting with natural redness, I discern it</l>
<l>Chang'd to a fatal yellow.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It is the general opinion of scholars that our Elizabethan
dramatists owed very little to the Greek drama directly, but
we cannot forget that Massinger had had a good education at
Oxford, and was a widely read man.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Shakspere's England</hi>, Vol. I., ix., <q>Scholarship,</q> by
Sir J. E. Sandys.</note> His forensic skill
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
often reminds us of Euripides; and if he did not know the
works of his illustrious predecessor, he would have found in
them a congenial spirit.<note place='foot'>It may be noted that the end of <hi rend='italic'>The Knight of Malta</hi> is
modelled on the last scene of the <hi rend='italic'>Alcestis</hi>. The play has been
attributed in part to Massinger, but the fact cited, though
interesting, does not prove acquaintance either on the part
of Fletcher or Massinger with Greek at first hand.</note>
</p>

<p>
The speech of Sanazarro to Giovanni in <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of
Florence</hi><note place='foot'>III., 1., 92-106.</note> reminds us of Creon's arguments in Sophocles'
<hi rend='italic'>Œdipus Tyrannus</hi>, line 596 κ.τ.λ.
</p>

<p>
The scene in <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>,<note place='foot'>IV., 2.</note> when the senators frighten the
mutinous slaves by shaking their whips, reminds us of the
Scythians in <hi rend='italic'>Herodotus</hi>,<note place='foot'>IV., 3.</note> but it is also found in <hi rend='italic'>Justin</hi>,<note place='foot'>II., 5.</note> and
Gifford points out that it may really have been borrowed from
a contemporary book of travels, Purchas's <hi rend='italic'>Pilgrims</hi>.<note place='foot'>I have not succeeded in finding the passage referred to.</note>
</p>

<p>
Massinger had a good working knowledge of mythology;
thus, references in his plays to Hercules and Alcides abound,
as they do in Shakspere. We find several false quantities in
proper names: Caesarĕa, in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi>; Archidămus,
in <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>; Eubŭlus, in <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>; Nomothētae, in
<hi rend='italic'>The Old Law</hi><note place='foot'>I., 1, 47. (Chreocopia, in I., 1, 54, may be scanned with
the accent on the penultimate.)</note>; Cybēle, in <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>.<note place='foot'>I., 2, 21 and 29; III., 2, 110. Eudocia in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor
of the East</hi> is more doubtful. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> IV., 5, 83; V., 1, 122; V., 2,
105; V., 3, 170.</note> We may compare
Shakspere's <hi rend='italic'>Andronĭcus</hi>; Anthrŏpos in <hi rend='italic'>Four Plays in
One</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Triumph of Time</hi>; and Euphānes in <hi rend='italic'>The Queen of
Corinth</hi>.<note place='foot'><p>Notice that in all these false quantities the stress is laid
on the syllable which bears the Greek accent; that is to say,
the words are scanned as a Byzantine Greek of the time would
have pronounced them. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> in Marlowe's <hi rend='italic'>Tamburlaine</hi>,
Pt. II., IV., 4: <q>As in the theoria of the world.</q> A similar
suggestion is anonymously made in <hi rend='italic'>The Times Literary
Supplement</hi>, March 20th, 1919, for another line of Marlowe:
<q>Our Pythagôras' Metempsýchosis.</q>
</p>
<p>
<q>Academy,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>, I., 1, 45, seems
accented on the last syllable.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>

<p>
It seems scarcely worth while to collect the passages which
show Massinger's knowledge of Latin; the authors he seems to
have known best are Ovid, Juvenal, and Horace. Swinburne
and others have commented on his indulgence in <q>the commonplace
tropes and flourishes of the schoolroom or the schools.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> p. 19, n. 2.</note>
</p>

</div>
<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_III'/>
<head>Appendix III. The Collaborated Plays</head>

<p>
The plays in which Massinger is supposed to have collaborated
with other authors are here set down, with the analyses made
by Boyle (<hi rend='italic'>D. N. B.</hi>, xxxvii., pp. 10-16) and the views of
Mr. A. H. Bullen in his article on Fletcher (<hi rend='italic'>D. N. B.</hi>, xix.,
pp. 303-311).<note place='foot'>Boyle's ascription is in each case printed first; M. signifies
the portions of each play which he allots to Massinger.
A. H. B. = Mr. Bullen, A. H. C. = the writer. Macaulay's
views will be found in <hi rend='italic'>The Cambridge History of English
Literature</hi>, vol. vi., Appendix to Chapter V.</note>
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The Honest Man's Fortune.</hi> (Field, Daborne, Massinger,
Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act III. or part of it.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: I doubt whether Massinger had any share in this
play. There are passages of ten-syllable lines in Act
III., 1 which are quite unlike him, while 2 and 3 are
interspersed with prose passages, a feature which
Massinger as a rule avoids.
</p>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>Thierry and Theodoret.</hi> (Massinger, Field, Fletcher, and
possibly a fourth writer.)
</p>

<p>
M: Act I., 2; Act II., 1, 3; Act IV., 2.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. attributes largely to Massinger, assigning Act III.
to an unknown author.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C. assigns to Massinger Act II., 1 and 3, and with
some hesitation Act I., 2; Act IV., 2.
</p>

<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>The Bloody Brother.</hi> (Massinger, Field, Fletcher, and
possibly a fourth writer.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I., Act V., 1.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. thinks that Fletcher and Jonson wrote the play,
and that Massinger revised it for a performance at
Hampton Court in January, 1636-37.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: There are clearly three hands at work here, one of
whom writes obscurely and uses a good deal of rhyme.
Act I., 1 reminds us of Massinger in several touches,
especially lines 269-70. The broken lines in this scene
are complete, as is Massinger's unfailing practice, but
the ten-syllable line is more common than is usually
the case with him. While Act V., 1 has some sentences
cast in the parenthetic form, the expressions
used are less lucid than we expect from Massinger.
</p>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>The Knight of Malta.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act III., 2, 3; Act IV., 1; possibly part of Act V., 2.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees, assigning Act II. and Act III., 1 to Fletcher.
</p>

<p>
<q>Some third person wrote Act I. and part of Act V.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: I trace Massinger only in Act III., 2.
</p>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>The Queen of Corinth.</hi> (Massinger, Fletcher (?), Field.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I., Act V.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. assigns Act II. to Fletcher, the rest to Middleton
and Rowley.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: Massinger wrote Act I., 1, 2, 3 from <q>Enter
Agenor,</q> V., 2. Fletcher wrote Act I., 3; Act II.,
1, 2, 3, 4; Act III., 1, 2; Act V., 3. As usual, he is
responsible for the comic parts. Act V., 4 is a vigorous
trial scene, not due, I think, to Massinger. The impression
that I get from Act III. is that Massinger
drafted it, and Fletcher worked over it.
</p>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>Sir John Van Olden Barnavelt.</hi> (Massinger, Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I., 1, 2; Act II., 1; Act III., 2, 3, 5; Act IV., 4, 5;
Act V., 1 to <q>Enter Provost.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees on the whole.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: Act III., 5, and Act IV., 5 seem to me unworthy of
Massinger. Perhaps a third hand wrote Act I., 3;
Act II., 2-7; Act III., 1, as far as <q>will ripen the
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
imposture</q>; Act III., 3; Act V., 1, as far as <q>Exeunt
wife and daughter.</q>
</p>

<p>
7. <hi rend='italic'>Henry the Eighth.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees, attributing a few passages to Shakspere,
notably the trial scene of Catherine.
</p>

<p>
Sir A. Ward thinks that Massinger and Fletcher wrote most
of the play, Shakspere only a little (<hi rend='italic'>H. E. D.</hi>, ii., 246).
</p>

<p>
Macaulay ascribes it to Shakspere and Fletcher, <q>perhaps
revised by Massinger.</q>
</p>

<p>
For a fuller discussion of this problem, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg084'>84-91</ref>.
</p>

<p>
8. <hi rend='italic'>The Two Noble Kinsmen.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I.; Act II., 1; Act III., 1, 2; Act IV., 3; Act V., 1
from line 19, 3, 4.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. thinks that Shakspere wrote additions for the revival
of an old play, <hi rend='italic'>Palamon and Arsett</hi>, which came
into the hands of Fletcher and Massinger after the
death of Shakspere. Massinger has interpolated his
own work in some of the Shakspere passages.
</p>

<p>
For a fuller discussion of this problem, <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> pp. <ref target='Pg092'>92-104</ref>.
</p>

<p>
9. <hi rend='italic'>The Custom of the Country.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act II., 1, 2, 3, 4; Act III., 4, 5; Act IV., 1, 2; Act V.,
1, 2, 3, 4.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees.
</p>

<p>
Macaulay adds part of Act V., 5 to Massinger.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: This play owes very little to Massinger. Boyle,
in attributing Act II. to him, must have been guided
solely by metrical considerations. There is not a
trace of his style in the Act. No doubt it is true
that Hippolyta is a type familiar in Massinger's
plays; and her sudden change of mind in the last act
reminds us of him. Again, the mental treatment to
which Duarte owes his cure (Act IV., 1), and the praises
of the medical profession (Act V., 4), recall <hi rend='italic'>A Very
Woman</hi> (II., 2, 26).
</p>

<p>
But we have to set a good deal against these facts. The
plot is more elaborate, bustling, and improbable than
we expect from Massinger. It is improbable that the
young men (Act II., 2) should leap into the sea and
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
leave Zenocia in the lurch. It is improbable that they
should swim a league to shore with their swords erect
in the air, though swords no doubt they must have
if they are to behave as Fletcher's gentlemen behave.
It is improbable that Rutilio in his flight (Act II., 4)
should take refuge in a palace and find himself in the
bedroom of the lady of the house. Difficulties of this
kind are familiar enough in Fletcher. It need scarcely
be said that Sulpicia and her establishment are due to
Fletcher alone.
</p>

<p>
To sum up, if Massinger had any share in this play, he may
have given hints or added touches in connexion with
Hippolyta and Duarte. The simplest supposition is
that he edited the play for a revival. The Prologue
and Epilogue <q>at a revival</q> contain expressions which
remind us of him. The Prologue ends thus (lines
18-20):
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 38'>You may allow</l>
<l>(Your candour safe) what's taught in the old schools,</l>
<l><q>All such as lived before you were not fools.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The parenthesis is in Massinger's manner.
</p>

<p>
Again, in the second Epilogue, line 7, we find <q>qualification,</q>
with which compare <q>fortification</q> in <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, I.,
2, 25.
</p>

<p>
10. <hi rend='italic'>The Elder Brother.</hi> (Fletcher (?), Beaumont; probably
revised generally by Massinger.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I., 1, 2; Act V., 1, 2.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. thinks that Massinger revised and completed it
after Fletcher's death, but says nothing about Beaumont.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: There are traces of Massinger in Act I., 1 and Act
V., 1, in which scenes we find careful metre and a good
many parentheses. While Act I., 2 resembles Massinger,
it seems to me to have a lighter touch than his.
In Act V., 1 we find a speech or two very much in
his manner, and characteristic also is the skill with
which an ambiguity is prolonged for some time in
this scene, and then dissipated. I doubt if he wrote
Act V., 2.
</p>

<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>

<p>
11. <hi rend='italic'>The Sea Voyage.</hi> (Massinger, Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act II., 1, 2; Act III., 1, from <q>Enter Rosellia</q>;
Act V., 1, 2, 3, 4.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. says nothing about Massinger here. Macaulay
doubts if he had any share in the play.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: The metre is throughout too rough for Massinger.
The plot does not recall his work in any way.
</p>

<p>
12. <hi rend='italic'>The Double Marriage.</hi> (Massinger, Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I., 1; Act III., 1; Act IV., 1, 2; Act V., 2, to <q>Enter
Pandulfo.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees.
</p>

<p>
Macaulay assigns all Act I. to Massinger.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C: I find no trace of Massinger in this improbable
play.
</p>

<p>
13. <hi rend='italic'>The Beggars' Bush.</hi> (Massinger, Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I., 1, 2, 3; Act V., 1, latter part; V., 2, lines 1-110.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. does not think Massinger's part is clearly marked.
</p>

<p>
Macaulay assigns to Massinger Acts I., II., III., and V.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: I find no trace of Massinger. Neither the plot is
lucid nor the expression. The commercial scenes and
the beggars' slang are both unlike anything in Massinger,
and alien to his courtly mind.
</p>

<p>
14. <hi rend='italic'>The False One.</hi> (Massinger, Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I.; Act V.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: Massinger wrote Act I., a good deal of Act IV.,
and Act V. There is hardly a scene except the Masque
in Act III., 4 which reads like Fletcher's unaided work.
The dignified rhetoric throughout the play has the
stamp of Massinger; more than that, the character-drawing
is like his. The outspoken Sceva reminds us
of the old courtier Eubulus in <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>. The rudeness
of Eros to Septimius in Act III., 2, reminds us of
Donusa in <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>. The continual changes of
mind on the part of Septimius are an effect which Massinger
loves. (<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Arsinoe and Photinus in Act
V., 4.)
</p>

<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>

<p>
15. <hi rend='italic'>The Prophetess.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Acts II., IV., V., 1, 2.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. thinks Massinger's share <q>very considerable.</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: Fletcher wrote Act I., 1, 2, and the Geta scenes
(Act I., 3; Act III., 2; Act IV., 3, 5; Act V., 3). Perhaps
some hack wrote the choruses (Act IV., 1; Act
V., 1) or are they inherited from an old play? The
main part of the play is due to Massinger. He certainly
had a hand in Act III., 1. Maximinian is a skilfully
drawn character on his lines.
</p>

<p>
16. <hi rend='italic'>The Little French Lawyer.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I.; Act III., 1; Act V., 1, from <q>Enter Cleremont,</q>
with traces of his hand in other scenes.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: Massinger can be traced at the beginning of Act
I., 1 and in Act III., 1 and Act IV., 5. The resemblances
are rather slight, and it is possible that they are
due to the fact that Fletcher occasionally imitated
Massinger.
</p>

<p>
17. <hi rend='italic'>The Lover's Progress.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I., 1, 2 (to <q>Enter Malefort</q>); Act II., 2; Act III.,
4, 6 (last two speeches); Act IV.; Act V.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. thinks it is <q>by Fletcher, with large alterations
by Massinger.</q> He refers to the explicit statement
in the Prologue where the reviser declares himself to
be&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 12'>ambitious that it should be known</l>
<l>What's good was Fletcher's, and what ill his own,</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
a statement in harmony with Massinger's well-known
modesty.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: Massinger wrote Act I., 1, Act II., 2. There are
traces of his work in Act III., 4, 6; Act IV., 2, 4; Act
V., 1, 3. The improbabilities of the plot&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, the
action of Clarangé&mdash;are due to Fletcher. It is clear
from the Prologue that the original play was too long.
Massinger probably cut it down, by leaving out, among
other things, scenes in which Lisander killed his two
foes. The play is probably to be identified with <hi rend='italic'>The
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
Wandering Lovers</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, entered as by Massinger
in the Stationers' Register, September 9th, 1653.
</p>

<p>
18. <hi rend='italic'>The Spanish Curate.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I.; Act III., 3; Act IV., 1, 4; Act V., 1, 3.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees.
</p>

<p>
Macaulay adds Act IV., 2 to Massinger.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: Massinger can be clearly traced in Act I., 1, Act
V., 1; not in Act V., 3. The trial scene (Act III, 3),
though on slighter lines than he uses as a rule, may be
due to him.
</p>

<p>
19. <hi rend='italic'>The Fair Maid of the Inn.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I.; Act III., 2; Act V., 3.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. attributes to Rowley and Massinger, and thinks
Fletcher's share very small.
</p>

<p>
Macaulay assigns to <q>Massinger and another (not
Fletcher).</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: Massinger wrote Act I., Act V., 3 as far as Clarissa's
speech. Fletcher wrote Act II., Act III., Act IV.,
Act V., 1, 2. The mother's device to save her son is the
sort of improbability from which Fletcher does not
shrink.
</p>

<p>
20. <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman.</hi> (Massinger and Fletcher.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I.; Act II., 1, 2, 3 down to <q>Enter Pedro</q>; Act
IV., 1, 3.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. identifies this play with <hi rend='italic'>The Woman's Plot</hi>, acted at
Court in 1621. In its present state it is a version of a
play by Fletcher, revised for a revival by Massinger
in 1634.
</p>

<p>
Macaulay assigns Act III. and Act IV., 1, 2, 3 to Fletcher.
For a discussion of this play <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> pp. 129-131.
</p>

<p>
21. <hi rend='italic'>The Second Maiden's Tragedy.</hi> (Massinger, Tourneur.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I., Act II.
</p>

<p>
In <hi rend='italic'>Eng. Stud.</hi>, ix. 234, Boyle, with some hesitation, regards
this play as <q>an early, anonymous, and unsuccessful
attempt of Massinger's.</q> Whoever wrote it, the work
is immature.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C. I find no trace of Massinger in this play, but a
great deal of Tourneur's manner. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <ref target='Appendix_XIII'>Appendix XIII</ref>.
</p>

<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>

<p>
22. <hi rend='italic'>Love's Cure.</hi> (Massinger and (?) Middleton.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I.; Act IV.; Act V., 1, 2.
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. agrees that the play is due to Massinger and Middleton.
</p>

<p>
Fleay thinks that Massinger altered a play by Beaumont
and Fletcher.
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: It is to be noted that the Prologue expressly
attributes the play to Beaumont and Fletcher. I find
nothing like Massinger except a few touches in Act I.,
1 and 3. The lightheartedness of the play reminds
us alike of Fletcher and Middleton; the romantic
atmosphere reminds us of the former, the inferiority
of the metre of the latter.
</p>

<p>
23. <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry.</hi> (Massinger and Field.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I.; Act III. (to <q>Enter Novall junior</q>); Act IV.,
2, 3, 4; Act V., 1, 2.
</p>

<p>
For further discussion <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <ref target='Appendix_XI'>Appendix XI</ref>.
</p>

<p>
24. <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr.</hi> (Massinger and Dekker.)
</p>

<p>
M.: Act I.; Act III., 1, 2; Act IV., 3; Act V., 2.
</p>

<p>
For a discussion of this verdict <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <ref target='Appendix_X'>Appendix X</ref>.
</p>

<p>
25. <hi rend='italic'>The Old Law.</hi> (Massinger, Middleton, Rowley.)
</p>

<p>
Massinger's share was slight, and can only have consisted in
revision for a later performance. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> supra, pp. <ref target='Pg141'>141-2</ref>.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Other Plays attributed in Part to Massinger.</hi>
</p>

<p>
26. <hi rend='italic'>The Laws of Candy.</hi>
</p>

<p>
A. H. B. thinks a large part was written by Massinger,
and that Fletcher cannot be traced.
</p>

<p>
Boyle (<hi rend='italic'>Eng. Stud.</hi>, vii. 75) thinks that though the metrical
treatment is like Beaumont's, the play is evidently
later in date, perhaps due to Shirley. Fleay (<hi rend='italic'>Eng.
Stud.</hi>, ix. 23) assigns it to Massinger and Field.
</p>

<p>
Macaulay says <q>probably by Massinger and another author
(not Fletcher).</q>
</p>

<p>
A. H. C.: I find no trace here of the Massinger that we know.
</p>

<p>
27. <hi rend='italic'>The Captain.</hi>
</p>

<p>
Macaulay: <q>By Fletcher and another, perhaps Massinger.</q>
</p>

<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>

<p>
A. H. C.: This is one of the many plays in the Fletcher
corpus which begins admirably and falls away into improbability.
I find no trace of Massinger here, though
the incident in Act IV., 5 reminds one of the banquet
in <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>, Act III., 6.
</p>

<p>
28. <hi rend='italic'>The Cure for a Cuckold</hi>, <q>a pleasant comedy written by
John Webster and William Rowley; London, 1661.</q>
</p>

<p>
It has been supposed by Fleay that the first act is due to
Massinger. It must be pointed out that a large part
of the play is written in prose, and that the verse parts
are not like Massinger. If one or two phrases remind
us of his style the stage is too crowded to make it likely
that it is his design. The real reason, no doubt, for
the assumption is that the incident of Clare and Lessingham
is similar to one in <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>.
Clare sends a letter to Lessingham in which she tells
him she will marry him if he will kill his dearest friend.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Prove all thy friends, find out the best and nearest,</l>
<l>Kill for my sake that friend that loves thee dearest.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But even so the incident is worked out with much
variety in detail.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Rupert Brooke in his <hi rend='italic'>Study on Webster</hi> (Appendix J)
arrives at the conclusion that Webster's play is subsequent
to Massinger's, both of them bearing a general
resemblance to Marston's <hi rend='italic'>Dutch Courtesan</hi>. The
stinging and incisive vigour of Marston's play is a great
contrast to the romantic treatment of the subject in
<hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>.
</p>

<p>
29. <hi rend='italic'>The Island Princess.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This is rather a dull play, though it contains some fine passages
and isolated lines. It is well constructed, and
contains one or two touches, such as <q>I love a soldier</q>
(I., 2) and <q>something shall be thought on</q> (II., 7),
which recall Massinger. And compare <q>When the
streams flow clear and fair, what are the fountains?</q>
(V., 2) with <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, I., 3, 282. The King in gaol
reminds us of <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>; the attempt of the
Queen Quisara to convert Armusia to her faith reminds
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
us of <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>. On the other hand, the metre is
singularly like Fletcher's throughout; the diction in
many details is unlike Massinger, and there are no
parentheses. Perhaps Fletcher was helped in this
play by some young man such as Brome who was
acquainted with Massinger's style.
</p>

<p>
30. <hi rend='italic'>The Double Falsehood, or The Distressed Lovers.</hi>
</p>

<p>
This play scarcely deserves serious consideration. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>
<ref target='Appendix_XV'>Appendix XV</ref>.
</p>

<p>
It will at once be seen how precarious and subjective
is much of this attribution. For example, to trace
four styles in a play is a difficult feat, yet Boyle
does this in (2) and (3). Brander Matthews, in discussing
the relation of Massinger and Fletcher, has
some interesting remarks, illustrated by modern
parallels. He points out that collaboration may be
either a chemical union or a mechanical mixture of the
authors' qualities, so that it is hard to decide which
process has taken place in a particular play. These
considerations lead him to doubt the finality of Boyle's
distribution of scenes.
</p>

<p>
Boyle's strong points are his argument from metrical details
and his intimate knowledge of the texts. I feel, however,
that the metrical test is open to the charge of
being mechanical when weighed against the impressions
which we gain from the evidence of construction,
style, and expressions. Massinger constructed his
plays well, and modelled his characters carefully,
whereas Fletcher, while excelling in isolated scenes,
shrank from no improbability which might be necessary
to carry the plot through. I am more conservative,
therefore, than Professor Gayley, who says that
<q>in <hi rend='italic'>The Spanish Curate</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Little French Lawyer</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Prophetess</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The Beggars' Bush</hi> Massinger's
contribution was fully as important as Fletcher's.
The general design appears to be the work of the former.
Fletcher fills in the details of comic business</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>R. E. C.</hi>, p. lxxxii.</note> and that
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
<q>he has no doubt about Massinger's part in <hi rend='italic'>The
Knight of Malta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Lover's Progress</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The Elder
Brother</hi>.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>R. E. C.</hi>, pp. lxxxiii-lxxxiv.</note>
</p>

<p>
Next, with regard to style and expression, when we
remember the intimacy of the two men, it is quite
possible that Massinger imitated Fletcher consciously
or unconsciously at some time of his life, and <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>.
Or we may put it in this way: there was a certain
amount of conventional stock-in-trade common to the
two writers, such a phrase, for instance, as, <q>To the
temple</q> when the inevitable marriage ceremony is
to take place. It would be absurd to suppose that
Fletcher never used such a phrase as <q>write nil ultra,</q>
which is no doubt a distinguishing mark of Massinger's
style. Again, Fletcher may have worked over drafts
of scenes in the first instance written by Massinger,
and there is evidence for supposing that in many cases
revision for a revival rather than co-operation is the
clue. Massinger's good judgment would make him
an excellent reviser.
</p>

<p>
It must, however, be allowed that the large amount of agreement
between two experts such as Boyle and Bullen is
remarkable. We cannot acquit those who produced
the Folio of Beaumont and Fletcher in 1647 of negligence
in omitting to give their due to Massinger and
other collaborators. On the other hand, it might
be argued that if Massinger's share in Fletcher's plays
were as large as Boyle believes it to have been, the
Folio would for very shame have acknowledged it;
and it must be pointed out that the large mass of commendatory
verses prefixed to the Folio entertains no
doubt of the traditional authorship.<note place='foot'>In particular G. Hill's poem deserves attention.</note>
</p>

<p>
Believing that the matter of first importance is to estimate
Massinger from the plays which he undoubtedly wrote,
I have not given above my evidence in full for the impressions
which I have formed of the <q>collaborated</q>
plays. The results of my study of these plays may be
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
summarised as follows: Massinger wrote considerable
portions of <hi rend='italic'>The Prophetess</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The False One</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Sir
John Van Olden Barnavelt</hi>. His work can be traced in
<hi rend='italic'>Thierry and Theodoret</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Bloody Brother</hi>. He
wrote the greater part of Acts I. and V. of <hi rend='italic'>The Queen of
Corinth</hi>, and of Acts I. and V. of <hi rend='italic'>The Elder Brother</hi>.
He wrote much of the same acts in <hi rend='italic'>The Little French
Lawyer</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Spanish Curate</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Fair Maid of the Inn</hi>.
He may have assisted in <hi rend='italic'>The Knight of Malta</hi>. He
revised for subsequent performance <hi rend='italic'>The Custom of the
Country</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Lover's Progress</hi>. He had nothing to
do with <hi rend='italic'>The Honest Man's Fortune</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Sea Voyage</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Double Marriage</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Beggars' Bush</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Love's Cure</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Laws of Candy</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Captain</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Cure for a Cuckold</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Island Princess</hi>. In my opinion, Massinger's
hand can be most clearly discerned in (1) serious plays;
(2) the serious parts of plays; (3) the first and last acts
of a joint composition.<note place='foot'>I have read with interest and care E. H. C. Oliphant's
articles in <hi rend='italic'>Englische Studien</hi> (xiv., xv., xvi.). He finds more
work of Beaumont in the plays than other scholars. Though
his knowledge of the whole subject is great, his analysis
seems to me too subtle; thus in <hi rend='italic'>The Fair Maid of the Inn</hi> we
find, according to Mr. Oliphant, scenes written by (1) Massinger,
(2) Massinger and Rowley, (3) Beaumont and Massinger,
(4) Beaumont, Fletcher, and Massinger. Fletcher's part in
the play is ultimately reduced to a few lines in IV., 1! I
cannot agree with him that Massinger wrote any of <hi rend='italic'>The
Coxcomb</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Faithful Friends</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>Love's Pilgrimage</hi>. In
<hi rend='italic'>The Faithful Friends</hi> the metre is very careless, and the occasional
bursts of bombast are not like Massinger. There are
touches of his style in the play, which suggest that a pupil
may have helped Fletcher. <hi rend='italic'>The Coxcomb</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Love's Pilgrimage</hi>
seem to me very characteristic works of Beaumont
and Fletcher. Mr. Oliphant has also discovered (<hi rend='italic'>Modern
Language Review</hi>, III., pp. 337-355) that Massinger wrote a
considerable portion of <hi rend='italic'>The Tempest</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Cymbeline</hi>. It is
not long since that we were reminded, in other departments
of art, of Lucas and Leonardo, of Ozias Humfrey and
Romney. The critical scent which Mr. Oliphant requires of
his readers postulates a super-dog careering through the
literary thickets of the English language. Let us rather read
and enjoy our composite plays, without meticulous analysis.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_IV'/>
<head>Appendix IV. On The Influence Of Shakspere</head>

<p>
The instances quoted in the text can be supplemented
by many others. Compare the diction and thought of the
following passages:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, IV., 3, 61:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Ministers of mercy,</l>
<l>Mock not calamity.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>, I., 4, 39:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Angels and ministers of grace defend us!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour</hi>, V., 1, 133:
</p>

<lg>
<l>And I to make all know I am not shallow,</l>
<l>Will have my points of cochineal and yellow.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Twelfth Night</hi>, II., 5, 169:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Remember who commended thy yellow stockings.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, I., 1, 177:
</p>

<lg>
<l>All kind of tortures; part of which they suffer'd</l>
<l>With Roman constancy.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Julius Cæsar</hi>, II., 1, 226:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Let not our looks put on our purposes,</l>
<l>But bear it as our Roman actors do,</l>
<l>With untired spirits and formal constancy.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, V., 1, 128.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, II., 2, 37:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 18'>Yet since thou art</l>
<l>So spaniel-like affected.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Midsummer-Night's Dream</hi>, II., 1, 205:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Use me but as your spaniel, spurn me, strike me.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Two Gentlemen of Verona</hi>, IV., 2, 14:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Yet, spaniel-like, the more she spurns my love,</l>
<l>The more it grows and fawneth on her still.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, IV., 5, 105:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Methinks I find Paulinus on her lips.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, III., 3, 341:
</p>

<lg>
<l>I found not Cassio's kisses on her lips.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, V., 2, 103:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Can I call back yesterday, with all their aids</l>
<l>That bow unto my sceptre? or restore</l>
<l>My mind to that tranquillity and peace</l>
<l>It then enjoyed?</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, III., 3, 330:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 14'>Not poppy, nor mandragora,</l>
<l>Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world,</l>
<l>Shall ever medicine thee to that sweet sleep</l>
<l>Which thou owedst yesterday.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, III., 3, 347:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'>O, now for ever</l>
<l>Farewell the tranquil mind! farewell content!</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, I., 1, 342:
</p>

<lg>
<l>An humble modesty, that would not match</l>
<l>A molehill with Olympus.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, IV., 2, 305:
</p>

<lg>
<l>As the lowly shrub is to the lofty cedar,</l>
<l>Or a molehill to Olympus, if compar'd,</l>
<l>I am to you, Sir.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor</hi>, III., 1, 3:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 20'>If you but compare</l>
<l>What I have suffered with your injuries</l>
<l>(Though great ones, I confess), they will appear</l>
<l>Like molehills to Olympus.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, I., 3, 193.)<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>A Woman killed with Kindness</hi>, III., 1:
</p>
<p>
And in this ground, increased this molehill<lb/>
Unto that mountain which my father left me.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Maid in the Mill</hi>, V., 2, Bustopha:
</p>
<p>
Oh mountain, shalt thou call a molehill a scab upon the face of the earth?
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Coriolanus</hi>, V., 3, 29:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 18'>My mother bows;</l>
<l>As if Olympus to a molehill should</l>
<l>In supplication nod.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan</hi>, III., 1, 204:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Thou didst not borrow of Vice her indirect,</l>
<l>Crooked, and abject means.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>2 Henry IV</hi>, IV., 5, 184:
</p>

<lg>
<l>God knows, my son,</l>
<l>By what by-paths and indirect crook'd ways</l>
<l>I met this crown.<note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>False One</hi>, III., 1, 28:
</p>
<p>
Let indirect and crooked counsels vanish.
</p></note></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, II., 2, 12:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Yes, and drink more in two hours</l>
<l>Than the Dutchman or the Dane in four and twenty.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>, I., 4, 18:
</p>

<lg>
<l>This heavy-headed revel east and west</l>
<l>Makes us traduced and tax'd of other nations.</l>
<l>They clepe us drunkards, and with swinish phrase</l>
<l>Soil our addition.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, II., 3, 78-87.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, IV., 5, 137:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 26'>Now, as a schoolboy,</l>
<l>Does kiss the rod that gave him chastisement.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Richard II</hi>, V., 1, 31:
</p>

<lg>
<l>And wilt thou, pupil-like,</l>
<l>Take thy correction mildly, kiss the rod?</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Two Gentlemen of Verona</hi>, I., 2, 58:
</p>

<lg>
<l>That, like a testy babe, will scratch the nurse,</l>
<l>And presently, all humbled, kiss the rod.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat</hi>, IV., 2, 6:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Let his passion work, and like a hot-reined horse</l>
<l>'Twill quickly tire itself.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>, I., 1, 132-4:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 32'>Anger is like</l>
<l>A full-hot horse, who being allow'd his way</l>
<l>Self-mettle tires him.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East</hi>, III., 1, 2:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 20'>A sudden fever</l>
<l>Kept me at home.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>, I., 1, 5:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 20'>An untimely ague</l>
<l>Stay'd me a prisoner in my chamber.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, II., 1, 20:
</p>

<lg>
<l>The furnace of your father's anger.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bondman</hi>, III., 3, 170:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 26'>Or yield up</l>
<l>Our bodies to the furnace of their fury,</l>
<l>Thrice heated with revenge.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>, I., 1, 140:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Heat not a furnace for your foe so hot</l>
<l>That it do singe yourself.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, V., 2, 158:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 26'>And now, in the evening,</l>
<l>When thou should'st pass with honour to thy rest,</l>
<l>Wilt thou fall like a meteor?</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>, III., 2, 226:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'>I shall fall</l>
<l>Like a bright exhalation in the evening,</l>
<l>And no man see me more.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, V., 4, 115:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 18'>In this casket are</l>
<l>Inestimable jewels.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Richard III</hi>, I., 4, 27:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Inestimable stones, unvalued jewels.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, I., 2, 17:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 20'>Since this bubble honour</l>
<l>(Which is indeed the nothing soldiers fight for)</l>
<l>With the loss of limbs or life, is in my judgment</l>
<l>Too dear a purchase.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>As You Like It</hi>, II., 7, 152:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Seeking the bubble reputation</l>
<l>Even in the cannon's mouth.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Picture</hi>, II., 2, 136:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 18'>It continuing doubtful</l>
<l>Upon whose tents plum'd victory would take</l>
<l>Her glorious stand.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, III., 3, 349:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Farewell the plumèd troops, and the big wars,</l>
<l>That make ambition virtue!</l>
</lg>

<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, V., 2, 82:
</p>

<lg>
<l>There is a scene that I must act alone.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Romeo and Juliet</hi>, IV., 3, 19:
</p>

<lg>
<l>My dismal scene I needs must act alone.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence</hi>, III., 1, 57:
</p>

<lg>
<l>What you deliver to me shall be lock'd up</l>
<l>In a strong cabinet, of which you yourself</l>
<l>Shall keep the key.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>, I., 3, 85.
</p>

<lg>
<l>'Tis in my memory locked,</l>
<l>And you yourself shall keep the key of it.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, I., 2, 18:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 16'>When he smiles, let such</l>
<l>Beware as have to do with him, for then,</l>
<l>Sans doubt, he's bent on mischief.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>, I., 5, 107:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 24'>Meet it is I set it down,</l>
<l>That one may smile, and smile, and be a villain.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Old Law</hi>, IV., 1, 36:
</p>

<p>
Besides, there will be charges saved too; the same rosemary
that serves for the funeral will serve for the wedding.<note place='foot'>Compare also <hi rend='italic'>Eastward Ho!</hi> Act II.: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Golding.</hi> Let me
beseech you, no, sir: the superfluity and cold meat left at
their nuptials will with bounty furnish ours.&mdash;Act III., 2:
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Quicksilver.</hi> Your father, and some one more, stole to
church with them in all the haste, that the cold meat left at
your wedding might serve to furnish their nuptial table.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>, I., 2, 180:
</p>

<lg>
<l>Thrift, thrift, Horatio! the funeral baked meats</l>
<l>Did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, III., 3, 133:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'>A hurtful vow</l>
<l>Is in the breach of it better commended,</l>
<l>Than in the keeping.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hamlet</hi>, I., 4, 15:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 38'>It is a custom</l>
<l>More honour'd in the breach than the observance.</l>
</lg>

<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Guardian</hi>, V., 1, 44:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 20'>These woods, Severino,</l>
<l>Shall more than seem to me a populous city.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Othello</hi>, I., 1, 77:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 18'>The fire is spied</l>
<l>In populous cities.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also IV., 1, 64.)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We may infer that Massinger studied the Folio of 1623
carefully.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_V'/>
<head>Appendix V. Warburton's List</head>

<p>
(<hi rend='italic'>Lansdowne MSS., B. M., 807.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
This volume contains three plays, the only survivors of
Warburton's collection: <hi rend='italic'>The Queen of Corsica</hi>, by Fran.
Jaques, <hi rend='italic'>The Second Maiden's Tragedy</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>The Bugbears</hi>,
together with a fragment of a fourth, R. Wild's <hi rend='italic'>Benefice</hi>.
</p>

<p>
On the back of the first leaf of this volume is attached the
list of Warburton's collection, in his own hand. The entries
referring to Massinger are as follows: I preserve the spelling.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Minerva's Sacrifice.</hi> Phill. Masenger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The Forc'd Lady a T.</hi> Phill. Massinger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Antonio &amp; Vallia</hi>, by Phill. Massinger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The Woman's Plott.</hi> Phill. Massinger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The Tyrant</hi>, a tragedy, by Phill. Massenger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Philenzo and Hipolito</hi>, a C. by Phill. Massenger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The Judge</hi>, a C. by Phill. Massenger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fast and Welcome</hi>, by Phill. Massinger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, C. by Phill. Massinger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The Honour of Women</hi>, a C. by P. Massinger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Alexius or the Chaste Gallant</hi>, T. P. Massinger.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>The Noble Choise</hi>, T.C. P. Massinger.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi> is attributed to Wm. Rowley. The
versification of the play which we have under that name
is far above Rowley's powers, nor are there signs of collaboration
in the play, as far as we can tell.
</p>

<p>
The list has been carefully discussed by Mr. W. W. Greg in
his article, <q>The Bakings of Betsy,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>The Library</hi> (July, 1911).
</p>

<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>

<p>
He puts the matter thus: Warburton enters <hi rend='italic'>Minerva's Sacrifice</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>The Forc'd Lady</hi> as above. In the <hi rend='italic'>Stationers' Register</hi>,
Sept. 9, 1653, these titles are given as alternatives for the same
play. This might mean that Moseley was trying to smuggle
through two plays for a single fee. Mr. Greg is inclined to
give Moseley the benefit of the doubt, and to suppose that there
were plays existing in divergent versions, which would justify
the double titles. If, however, Moseley was honest, Warburton
cannot be correct. Mr. Greg suggests that Warburton, being
interested in old plays, and having access to the <hi rend='italic'>Stationers'
Register</hi>, drew up for his own use a list, mainly based on
Moseley's entries, containing the titles of such pieces as he
thought it might be possible to recover, and added the names of
those in his possession. The cook destroyed some of the plays,
and Warburton, discovering his loss, added the famous memorandum
to the text without remembering that it contained the
names of plays which he did not possess. In this case the
damage done by <q>Betsy</q> would not be so extensive as has
been believed.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_VI'/>
<head>Appendix VI. A Metrical Peculiarity In Massinger</head>

<p>
Our dramatic writers must have often felt that their metre
required variety to relieve it from the dangers of facility and
monotony. No doubt the same problem suggested itself to
Homer and the Greek dramatists. In the former, the frequent
pauses after the first foot or in the middle of the second
foot, in the latter, the much-discussed pauses after the first
foot, are as likely to be due to a desire for variety as to any
special emphasis on the particular words thus singled out.<note place='foot'>For this frequent effect in Homer <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, I., lines 100, 103,
132, 139, 144, 160, 184, 195, etc. In the <hi rend='italic'>Agamemnon</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Alcestis</hi>, to take no other plays, note the following: <hi rend='italic'>Agamemnon</hi>
15, 1047, 1079, 1123; <hi rend='italic'>Alcestis</hi>, 154, 181, 203, 339, 347, 619.</note>
</p>

<p>
In what ways did the Elizabethans secure variety?<note place='foot'>The quadrisyllabic scansion of such a word as <q>remission</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, II., 2, 107) has not, in my opinion, any
metrical significance in Massinger. It is, indeed, very frequently
found, so frequently as to be no criterion of his style.
I fancy that it may be more often found in passages which he
wrote against time, or when his head was tired.</note>
</p>

<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>

<p>
1. By the use of rhyme. This was the early solution.
Massinger does not often resort to rhyme, though in some
of his plays, notably in <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>, he several times
employs the well-known couplet at the end of a scene.
</p>

<p>
2. By the free use of the eleven-syllable line. This was
Fletcher's solution. It is astonishing how the pleasure which
the occasional use of this licence gives us turns to a feeling
of satiety and weakness when it is too freely employed, so
that many passages in Fletcher sound like a horse with a fit
of roaring.
</p>

<p>
3. In the free use of trisyllabic feet. This fact has been
recently brought before the public by Mr. Bayfield in connexion
with Shakspere. There is no need to quote instances
of this common and easy expedient.
</p>

<p>
4. By the occasional use of short lines. As has been pointed
out above,<note place='foot'>Page <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, n. 1.</note> Massinger is a strict metrist, and does not often
resort to this liberty, even in rapid conversation.
</p>

<p>
5. By skilful variation of pauses, such as we find in Milton,
Tennyson, and most of our modern writers of blank verse.
Massinger's flexible and meandering sentences contain many
examples of such variation.
</p>

<p>
I believe that he had another shaft in his quiver. He occasionally
suppressed a short syllable at the close of the line,
and more rarely in the early part, with the result that an
anapaestic lilt of some effectiveness makes its appearance.
An example from <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi> will make this clear.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Pulcheria.</hi> What ís thy náme?</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Athenais.</hi> The forlorn Áthenáis (I., 1, 342).</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
If the stresses are placed as above, it is clear that there is a
syllable suppressed after the word <q>forlorn,</q> a three-syllable
foot in the third place, and an anapaestic lilt, <q>the forlorn.</q>
</p>

<p>
Nor is Massinger alone in this device; instances from other
poets are quoted below. This theory conflicts with the dictum
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
of Schmidt in his Shaksperian lexicon, that words like
<q>forlorn,</q> <q>complete,</q> <q>supreme,</q> <q>conceal'd,</q> can be
stressed either on the first or second syllable, the stress
being on the first syllable when the stress in the following
word falls on the first syllable. Presumably Schmidt would
have scanned the line in question thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>What ís thy náme? The fórlorn Áthenáis.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Schmidt's dictum, however, will not explain all the cases
quoted below, and it is worth considering whether it is not a
simpler solution of the problem to suppose that our Elizabethan
poets combined uniformity of accent with variety in
the metre, sometimes applied more than once in the same line.
It is clear that lines which contain a past participle like <q>condemned</q>
cannot be used for the purposes of this argument,
as such words may have been scanned as two syllables or three.
</p>

<p>
The following cases will support my suggestion. The list
does not profess to be a complete summary of the evidence.
</p>

<p>
1. <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>, III., 4, 139:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>To búild me úp a compléte^prínce, 'tis gránted.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
2. <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>, III., 1, 32:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Mónkeys and páraquíttos consúme^thóusands.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
(Here the first foot is a trochee. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, Nos. 6, 8, 20,
21, 36, 43, 48.)
</p>

<p>
3. <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, I., 1, 65:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Of stránge and resérved párts; but a gréat^sóldier.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
4. <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, II., 1, 143:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Which súllied wíth the tóuch of impúre^hánds.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
5. <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, III., 3, 89:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Were thís sad spéctaclé for secúre^gréatness.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
6. <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, IV., 3, 192:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Máde for your sátisfáction, the póor^wrétch.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
7. <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, V., 2, 20:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>All éngines tó assáult him. Indéed^vírtue.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
8. <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, I., 1, 81:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Ín a relígious schóol, where divíne^máxims.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
9. <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, I., 3, 152:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Have cálled your ánger ón, in a frówn^shów it.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>

<p>
10. <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, II., 4, 58:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Displéasures agaínst^thóse, withóut whose mércy.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
11. <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, III., 2, 36:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I é'er had íreful fiérceness, a stéel'd^héart.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
12. <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, IV., 3, 79:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Forsáke a sevére,^náy, impérious místress.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
13. <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>, V., 1, 7:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>That wíll for éver árm me agaínst^féars.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
14. <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, I., 1, 127:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And íf my grácious úncle, the gréat^dúke.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
15. <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, I., 2, 29:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>To thínk her wórthy of yóu, besídes^chíldren.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
16. <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, II., 1, 133:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And máke a pláin discóvery. The dúke's^cáre.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
17. <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, II., 3, 66:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The swéetness óf her bréath. Such a bráve^státure.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
18. <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, III., 1, 66:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>On whát desígn, or whíther, the dúke's^wíll.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
19. <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, IV., 1, 102:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And píety bé forgótten. The dúke's^lúst.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
20. <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, V., 2, 3:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Ín the great státes it cóvers. The dúke's^pléasure.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
21. <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke of Florence</hi>, V., 3, 127:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Équal offénders, whát we shall spéak^poínts.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
22. <hi rend='italic'>The City Madam</hi>, III., 3, 78:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Relígious chárity; to sénd^ínfidéls.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
23. <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, III., 3, 90:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And sénsual báseness; íf thy profáne^hánd.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
24. <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, IV., 2, 60:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>'Tis ímpióus in mán to prescríbe^límits.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
25. <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi>, V., 3, 179:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>There's nó conténding agáinst^déstiný.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
26. <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi>, II., 3, 42:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Not fár off dístant, appéars^dím with énvy.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
27. <hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi>, IV., 1, 35:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Yet wáking, I' ne'er chérished obscéne^hópes.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>

<p>
28. <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, I., 1, 144:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And secúre^gréatness wíth the trúe relátion.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
29. <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, I., 2, 10:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>A póint of jústice, his wórds^fúll in méasure.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
30. <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, II., 2, 265:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Undergó the sáme^púnishmént which óthers.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
31. <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>, I., 1, 285:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>This profáne^lánguage. Práy you, bé a mán.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
32. <hi rend='italic'>The Guardian</hi>, I., 2, 21:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Your hónour detésts^fláttery, Í might sáy.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
33. Epilogue 2:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Tó the still dóubtful áuthor, at whát^ráte.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
34. <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>, II., 3, 26:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>You nów expréss yoursélf a compléte^lóver.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
35. <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>, III., 2, 149:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>To háve the gréatest bléssing, a trúe^fríend.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
36. <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>, IV., 1, 95:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Cást yourself ón her cóuch. Oh, divíne^dóctor!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
37. <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1, 69:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The módern víces. Begín;^réad the bílls.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
38. <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1, 184:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The ápplicátion, ánd in a pláin^stýle.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
39. <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1, 520:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Led thríce through Páris; thén at the cóurt,^gáte.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
40. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, I., 1, 48:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Of the sóuls^rávishing músic; the sáme^áge.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
(A highly irregular line.)
</p>

<p>
41. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, I., 2, 73:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Are búried in hér; the lóud^nóise of|wár.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
42. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, I., 2, 106:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Her kíngly cáptive abóve^áll the wórld.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
43. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, I., 2, 184:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Dóted on thís Semiramís, a kíng's^wífe.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
(The third foot here is u u u u.)
</p>

<p>
44. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, I., 2, 248:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Beyónd my júst propórtion. Abóve^wónder!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>

<p>
45. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, II., 1, 35:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Appéar, and, what's móre, appéar^pérfect, híss me.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
46. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, II., 1, 66:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Their fáirest íssue to méet^sénsuálly.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
47. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, II., 1, 165:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>My énd must bé to stánd in a córn^fíeld.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
48. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, II., 2, 286:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Í should fix hére, where bléssings beyónd^hópe.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
49. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, III., 2, 40:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>They thánk'd the bríngers óf it. The póor^lády.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
50. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, III., 5, 161:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>What cán you stáke against it. A quéen's^fáme.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
51. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, IV., 4, 64:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>If thís take nót, I am chéated. To slíp^ónce.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
52. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, V., 3, 11:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Befóre he góes to súpper. Ha! Is my hóuse^túrn'd.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
(The fourth foot is u u u &mdash;.)
</p>

<p>
53. <hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, V., 3, 40:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And néed no tútor. Thís is the gréat^kíng.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
It will be noted that the rhythm often occurs in a broken
line&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, a line divided between two speakers. <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Nos. 7,
20, 36, 44, 50, 51, 52, 53. (<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>,
I., 1, 342.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The False One</hi>, I., 1:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>What néarer plédges chállenge: résign^ráther.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The False One</hi>, V., 4:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>The stóry óf a supréme^mónarchý.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Prophetess</hi>, I., 3:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Chéerful and gráteful tákers the góds^lóve.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Prophetess</hi>, I., 3:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Nor múst I revéal^fúrther, till you cléar it.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Prophetess</hi>, III., 1:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>For ládies of high^márk, for divíne^beáuties.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Lover's Progress</hi>, I., 1:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>To Cúpid agáinst^Hýmen! Óh, mine hónour.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Fair Maid of the Inn</hi>, I., 1:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>A compléte^cóurtier! máy I livé to sée him.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Thierry and Theodoret</hi>, IV., 2:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Thou dóst throw chárms upón me, agáinst^whích.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Thierry and Theodoret</hi>, IV., 2:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Aṅd the place whére, the pálace, agáinst,^áll.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Jew of Malta</hi>, I., 2:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And extréme^tórtures óf the fíery déep.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Dr. Faustus</hi>, I., 1:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And Í that háve with concíse^sýllogísms.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Nero</hi>, I., 4:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>O sevére^ánger óf the highest góds.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Rule a Wife</hi>, I., 1:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>For thére I dáre be bóld to appéar^óften.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Maid in the Mill</hi>, I., 3:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Now by' the sóul of lóve, a divíne^créature.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII</hi>, II., 1, 11:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I'll téll you ín a líttle. The gréat^dúke.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I believe that many of the rhythms from Shakespeare quoted
by Schmidt and by Mr. R. Bridges in his <q>Milton's Prosody,</q>
can be explained in this way.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_VII'/>
<head>Appendix VII. <q>Believe As You List</q></head>

<p>
This play was edited by Mr. T. Crofton Croker, with a short
Preface, in the Percy Society's Publications, Vol. XXVII.,
1849. The Tudor Society has published a photographic
facsimile of the MS., now in the British Museum (Egerton
MSS., 2828). <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> B.M. Catalogue of Additions, 1907, p. 384.
The MS. was purchased for the Museum at a sale on November
27, 1900, for £69. It is of paper. The original document,
measuring 12-1/2 inches by 7-1/2 inches, comprises folios
5 to 29; folios 2 and 3 are the old vellum cover.
</p>

<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>

<p>
Mr. Croker's account of the MS. (Pref., p. ix) runs as follows:
</p>

<p>
<q>The MS., from its commencement to the termination of the
licence, was written on forty-eight pages of foolscap paper,
in a small hand, sometimes not easy to be read. Of the
second leaf only an inconsiderable portion remains, and the
top and bottom of the paper have been injured in some places
by damp. In four additional pages after the licence, the Prologue,
Epilogue, and property directions are preserved.
The MS. is stitched up in a parchment cover, which appears to
have been a cancelled <q>Indenture</q> of Elizabeth's reign.
On the outside page of this parchment, or back of the cancelled
indenture, is written the title, in what I agree with Mr.
Beltz in regarding as Massinger's autograph.</q><note place='foot'>The autograph and Herbert's Imprimatur are reproduced
in facsimile in the Percy Society volume. But would Massinger
have referred to himself as <hi rend='italic'>Mr.</hi> Massenger [<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>]?</note>
</p>

<p>
From the letter of Mr. S. Beltz, given by Mr. Crofton Croker,
we learn that Gifford had more than once lamented to Mr.
Croker the disappearance of this MS., which Colley Cibber
had seen;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Apology</hi>, ii. 203. C. Cibber, in a list of dramatic authors,
makes reference to Massinger's plays. He says: <q>Mr. Massinger,
I believe, was author of several other dramatic pieces:
one I have seen in MS., which I am assured was acted, by the
proper quotations, etc. The title runs thus: <q>Believe as you
list, written by Mr. Massinger, with the following licence:
<q>This play, called <q>Believe as you list,</q> may be acted this
6th of May, 1631. Henry Herbert.</q></q></q> Malone (<hi rend='italic'>Shakspere</hi>,
vol. iii., p. 230) gives the date (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, of the actual performance
as May 7th, 1631.</note> and that the MS. had formerly been in David
Garrick's hands. Mr. S. Beltz also says: <q>It is well known
from other sources that the play was acted on May 7, 1631.</q>
</p>

<p>
The MS. had belonged to George Beltz, Lancaster Herald,
and executor of Garrick's widow. His brother Samuel found
it among <q>a mass of rubbish.</q> It was in the possession of
J. O. Halliwell Phillips at one time. This well-known Shaksperian
scholar inserted a note about it on p. 1, in which he
says, <hi rend='italic'>inter alia</hi>: <q>This is one of the few play-house copies of
any English plays before the suppression of theatres known
to exist. I strongly suspect it has some corrections in Massinger's
own autograph.</q>
</p>

<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>

<p>
Sir George F. Warner, in the <hi rend='italic'>Athenæum</hi> (January 19, 1901)
discusses the MS. He believes it is in Massinger's own hand,
as the alterations are made <foreign rend='italic'>currente calamo</foreign>. This fact can
easily be verified from a perusal of the MS. Sir G. Warner,
after comparing the MS. with the Henslowe document at
Dulwich, arrived at the conviction that the writing was
Massinger's. He considers that the title and marginal stage-directions
are due to the manager, and that the Prologue and
Epilogue are in a third hand. He points out that <q>Carthage</q>
is written over <q>Venice</q> (Crofton Croker, p. 41), <q>Affricque</q>
over <q>Europe</q> (p. 44), and <q>Berecinthius</q> over <q>Sampayo</q>
(p. 79).<note place='foot'>The references are as follows: II., 2, 368; III., 1, 20;
IV., 3, initial stage direction.</note> He proceeds to explain the reason for these alterations,
and then emends some of Mr. Croker's mistakes.
</p>

<p>
With all due deference to the great authority of Sir G.
Warner, I do not feel certain that this hand is that of the appeal
to Henslow. On the other hand, we must remember that
seventeen years had elapsed, and that it is unlikely that a
poor man like Massinger would have employed an amanuensis.
Capital <q>I,</q> <q>s,</q> <q>f,</q> and <q>e</q> are alike in the two documents;
but <q>ve</q> in <q>have ever</q> did not seem to me to be
the same, nor did any of the <q>r's</q> at Dulwich resemble the
hand in the play.<note place='foot'><p>Beside the Henslow document there are to be seen at
Dulwich College four signatures of Massinger, in a beautiful
clear hand; three of these are attached to leases of Alleyn's,
and the fourth is added to Daborne's signature to the document
mentioned by Cunningham in his Preface (p. xii.). The poem
<q><hi rend='italic'>Sero sed serio</hi></q> is to be found in B.M. Royal MSS. XVIII.,
A. 20. The signature is identical with the Dulwich signatures.
The poem itself is in another hand, with many flourishes.
</p>
<p>
The only reason for supposing it to be the poet's, besides his
poverty, is an erasure in line 14, which runs thus:
</p>
<p>
then<lb/>
Being,^silent then,
</p>
<p>
which looks like a correction made by the author himself,
<foreign rend='italic'>currente calamo</foreign>. The hand of <hi rend='italic'>The Second Maiden's Tragedy</hi>
does not resemble that of <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>. The hand of
<hi rend='italic'>Sir John Van Olden Barnavelt</hi> is uniform throughout. It is
neat and full of flourishes, especially in the letter L. It is,
of course, possible that Massinger wrote this in 1619. The
stage directions are in a bolder hand and deep black ink.
They are plainly part of the MS., and not later insertions like
those in <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>. I incline to think the writing
is all due to an amanuensis. There is very little correction
in the play, except that several long passages are very thoroughly
scrawled out.</p></note>
</p>

<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>

<p>
There are few mistakes in the MS. beyond those which the
writer has corrected himself. The corrections and additions
all appear to be in the same hand. The simplest explanation
of the MS. is to suppose that Massinger had before him the
MS. of the play which had been condemned by the Censor,
and that he copied it out again, making the necessary changes
of name, etc. This would account for one or two mistakes
which the writer has corrected.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Appendix VIII.: I., 1, 26; I., 2, 186; II., 1, 51; II., 2,
217; II., 2, 368; III., 1, 20; IV., 3, stage direction.</note> In other passages we can
see his judgment at work, altering the phraseology,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Appendix VIII.: I., 1, 60; I., 2, 67; I., 2, 72; II., 2,
52; II., 2, 56; III., 3, 151; III., 3, 234; IV., 1, 7.</note> or expanding
one line into two.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Appendix VIII.: II., 2, 285; IV., 1, 5; IV., 3, 44.</note> Sometimes a word is repeated
from a previous line and then cancelled,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Appendix VIII.: II., 2, 98; II., 2, 240; III., 3, 166;
IV., 4, 45.</note> as if the writer had
been tired, as he might well be. The writing combines German
and Italian forms.
</p>

<p>
The play was remodelled from its original form by order of
the Censor.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> p. 15, n. 1.</note> Sir G. Warner has pointed out that it is derived
from <q>the strangest adventure that ever happened, either
in the ages passed or present: containing a discourse concerning
the successe of the King of Portugal, Dom Sebastian. London:
printed for Frances Henson, dwelling in the Blackfriers, 1601.</q><note place='foot'>Koeppel (<hi rend='italic'>Quellen-Studien</hi>) traces the story to P. V. P.
Cayet's <hi rend='italic'>Chronologie Septenaire</hi>, Paris, 1605. He does not
seem to have consulted <hi rend='italic'>The Strangest Adventure</hi>, a copy of
which may be seen in the British Museum. <hi rend='italic'>The True History
of the Late and Lamentable Adventures of D. S.</hi> (London, 1602)
begins with the imprisonment at Naples, and agrees with
Cayet almost verbally until the latter part. <hi rend='italic'>The Continuation
of the Lamentable Adventures</hi> (London, 1603) is very dull,
and contributes nothing except the advice of an old man to
Sebastian, which may have suggested the first scene of the play.
The two tracts are to be found in Harleian Miscellany
(iv., 403; v., 443). <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Scott-Saintsbury's <hi rend='italic'>Dryden</hi>, vii.,
p. 309, <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> The English pamphlets are based on the <hi rend='italic'>Aventure
Amirable</hi>, published in 1601. (<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Bullen's <hi rend='italic'>Peele</hi>, i, 227.)
Massinger must have used Cayet for the incidents in the
latter part of the play.</note>
</p>

<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>

<p>
This book is the story of a claimant to the throne of Portugal.
On p. 78 we have <q>the markes and signes which the King of
Portugall Dom Sebastian beares naturally on his body.</q>
Twenty-two in all are given. Among them are:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>(1) He hath the right hand greater than the left.</l>
</lg>

<p>
(2) The right arme longer than the left.
</p>

<p>
(5) The right legge is longer than the left.
</p>

<p>
(6) The right foote greater than the other.
</p>
</quote>

<p>
Compare these statements with the words erased in the MS.,
folio 8.<note place='foot'>After Berecinthius says <q>His stature! speech!</q> in I., 2,
186.</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
1 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Marchant</hi>:
</p>

<lg>
<l>His verie hand legge and foote, and the lefte side</l>
<l>Shorter than on the right.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(12)  He hath little pimples on his face and hands.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> 2 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Marchant</hi>:
</p>

<lg>
<l>The moles upon</l>
<l>His face and hands<note place='foot'>I., 2, 187.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(21)  Another marke or wound upon the head.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(22)  Another upon the right eye-brow.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> 3 <hi rend='smallcaps'>Marchant</hi>:
</p>

<lg>
<l>The scarres, caused by his hurts,</l>
<l>On his right browe and head.<note place='foot'>I., 2, 188.</note></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>(14) He lackes one tooth on the right side in the neather jaw.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>Berecinthius</hi>:
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 20'>The hollownesse</l>
<l>Of his under jawe, occasion'd by the losse</l>
<l>Of a tooth pull'd out by his chirurgion.<note place='foot'>I., 2, 189.</note></l>
</lg>

<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>

<lg>
<l>(18)  The lip of Austriche,<note place='foot'>The <q>Austrian lip</q> is one of the features Mistress Carol
ascribes to Fairfield in Shirley's <hi rend='italic'>Hyde Park</hi> (III., 2).</note> like his</l>
<l>Grandfather Charles the Fift, Emperor,</l>
<l>Father to his mother, and of his</l>
<l>Grandmother, Catherine, Queen of</l>
<l>Portugall, mother to his father, sister</l>
<l>To the said Charles the Fift.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Compare the original reading in the play,<note place='foot'>I., 2, 186.</note> <q>His nose! his
German lippe!</q> Over German <q>very</q> has been written, and
underneath is traceable the <q>A</q> of Austrian.
</p>

<p>
These passages leave no doubt as to the derivation of the
earlier part of the story which Massinger dramatised.
</p>

<p>
On p. 45 of <hi rend='italic'>The Strangest Adventure</hi> we read that Dom
Sebastian comes to Venice <q>very poorely, and robbed by five
of his own servants, which he entertained in Cicilie.</q> This
incident occurs in <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, Act I. At Venice he
was persecuted by the <q>embassadour of Castile,</q> whose name
is not given, but whose place in the play is taken by Flaminius.
On p. 49 he is said to have been beaten by the Moors in Africa
in 1578, and to be now (1600) a prisoner at Venice. In <hi rend='italic'>Believe
as You List</hi> the period of twenty-two years is referred to as
the interval during which Antiochus has been travelling about
the world.<note place='foot'>I., 1, 64.</note> On p. 50 Dom Sebastian arrives at Venice with
<q>but one poor gazete.</q> In the play Antiochus, after being
robbed by his servants, finds <q>a waste paper</q> lying near him,
and speaks as follows:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 20'>There is something writ more.</l>
<l>Why this small piece of silver? What I read may</l>
<l>Reveal the mystery: <q rend='pre'>Forget thou wert ever</q></l>
<l>Called King Antiochus. With this charity</l>
<l><q rend='post'>I enter thee a beggar.</q><note place='foot'>I., 1, 135.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On p. 67 Sebastian is set free, and on p. 86 he goes to
Florence, on his way to Marseilles, with some talk of trying
to establish his identity in Holland. But the narrative closes
abruptly, and we know no more of the claimant to the Portuguese
throne from <hi rend='italic'>The Strangest Adventure</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The ineffectiveness of the play may be partly due to the
necessity of altering the original modern setting to an ancient
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
one. It is hard, for example, to see how the monk Sampayo was
metamorphosed into Berecinthius, the fat priest of Cybele.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Croker's reprint was the cause of a very pretty literary
quarrel between the Shakespeare Society and the Percy
Society. A writer who signed himself <q>A Member of both
Societies</q> published a pamphlet animadverting on Mr.
Croker's abilities as an editor,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Shakespeare Society's Papers</hi>, vol. iv., art. xiv.</note> and Mr. Croker replied in no
measured terms. The documents may be seen at the British
Museum.
</p>

<p>
The anonymous writer, working on the many indications
given in the marginal notes, reconstructed the cast of <hi rend='italic'>Believe
as You List</hi>.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Shakespeare Society's Papers</hi>, p. 138.</note> <q>My cast,</q> he says, <q rend='pre'>has been a work of difficulty,
and, in the case of some of the minor performers, a
matter of considerable doubt, more especially as a few of them
doubled or even trebled their parts; and as we here see (the
only instance of the kind I am acquainted with), perhaps
exchanged characters during the progress of the play.</q>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Antiochus               J. Taylor.<note place='foot'>Famous names. <q>Taylor acted Hamlet incomparably
well.</q> Colley Cibber's <hi rend='italic'>Apology</hi>, 2, 142</note></l>
<l>Flaminius               J. Lowin.</l>
<l>Lentulus                R. Robinson.</l>
<l>Marcellus               R. Benfield.</l>
<l>Berecinthius            T. Pollard.</l>
<l>Chrysalus               E. Swanston.</l>
<l>Demetrius               W. Patrick.</l>
<l>Amilcar                 &mdash; Rowland.</l>
<l>1 Merchant              J. Honeyman.</l>
<l>2 Merchant              W. Penn.</l>
<l>3 Merchant              &mdash; Curt.</l>
<l>Calistus                T. Hobbes.</l>
<l>Titus                   R. Baxter.</l>
<l>Queen to Prusias        &mdash; Ball.</l>
<l>Cornelia                &mdash; Nick.</l>
<l>Courtesan               &mdash; Boy.</l>
</lg>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>With regard to the three female parts, and another of a
Moorish woman,<note place='foot'>V., 2, 139.</note> we are left much in the dark, and I have
placed names against them with considerable hesitation.</q>
</p>

<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>

<p>
<q>The actors who doubled their parts were W. Penn, who
was also a Jailor; Rowland, who was also King Prusias;
Patrick, who was also a Captain; and Baxter, who was also an
officer and a servant, besides, as well as we can judge, delivering
a speech or two as Demetrius. Rowland must also have
trebled his small parts. Besides these, we hear in the course
of the play of W. Mago, Gascoine, Herbert, and Harry Wilson;
the last was a singer.... It need hardly be added that the
'tragedy' was got up and acted by the Company called the
King's Players, all the names being those of performers in that
association in 1631.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_VIII'/>
<head>Appendix VIII. Collation Of Ms. Of <q>Believe As You List</q></head>

<p>
This play is accessible to the general public at present in
Colonel Cunningham's edition of Massinger, and in Mr.
Arthur Symons's edition in <q>The Mermaid Series.</q> An examination
of the original MS., now in the British Museum, shows
that Cunningham's text is not always correct. Though an exhaustive
collation of the MS. is not necessary, several points
of interest emerge from a study of the original document, which
I have digested here. (C. = Cunningham's edition; MS. =
Manuscript reading. Brackets signify Cunningham's conjectural
additions, which he has not always taken the trouble
to indicate.)
</p>

<p>
Page 595. There is no list of dramatis personae in MS.
</p>

<p>
I., 1.&mdash;C.: Enter Antiochus and a Stoic. The three servants
enter after line 118.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Antiochus Stoic in philosopher's habits; Chrysalus
with a writing, Syrus, Geta, bondmen.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 26.&mdash;C.: Stoic.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Stoic: Hermit (cancelled).
</p>

<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>

<p>
I., 1, 56.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Old (He) sper with his fierce beams (scorch)ing in vain</l>
<l>Their (wives, their sisters and their tender daughters).</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
MS.: The line is much damaged, being the last on the
page. A mention of the old after the young
(lines 52 to 55) seems to be required.
</p>

<p>
I read it thus: Olde men with sil ... in vain.
There is no trace of 57, but it is required by
the sense.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 60.&mdash;MS.: The soldiers' greedy lusts. <q>Greedy</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 85.&mdash;C.: A prey so precious and so dearly purchased.
</p>

<p>
MS.: A prey so precious and dearly purchased.
</p>

<p>
<q>Precious</q> is scanned as a trisyllable.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 117.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 16'>The imperious waves</l>
<l>(Of my) calamities have already fallen.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
MS.: <q>Of my</q> is not in MS. The last word of 118 is
<q>Swollen.</q> The word <q>Marvell</q> can be seen
at the end of a line after 118.
</p>

<p>
Here comes a hiatus of two pages. No doubt
Antiochus had a fairly long soliloquy. It is impossible
to tell how many lines are lost here, as
the characters seem to be conducting a rapid dialogue,
in which it is not necessary to suppose
that a whole line was assigned to each speaker
at a time.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 119.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Despair with sable wings</l>
<l>(Sail-stretch'd ab)ove my head.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
MS.: Ore my head. A verb is wanted. (?) Sail-stretch'd
flies o'er my head.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 121.&mdash;MS.: ... ius furnished me. The line begins with
a name to which there is no clue, probably introduced
in the part now lost.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 122.&mdash;C.: (And) make my first appearance like myself.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>MS.: Made       ? Which made, etc.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I., 1, 123.&mdash;C.: (Have these) disloyal villains ravished from
me. Addition required by sense.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 124.&mdash;C.: (Wret)ch that I was.
</p>

<p>
MS.: <q>ch</q> at end of a word which has disappeared.
<q>Wretch</q> gives the sense.
</p>

<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>

<p>
I., 1, 125.&mdash;C.: (With) such a purchase.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Such a purchase. The first word in the line has
disappeared.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 126.&mdash;C.: Without (the) gold to fee an advocate.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Without gold to fee an advocate. The first word
in the line has disappeared. (?) And.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 127.&mdash;C.: (To) plead my royal title, nourish hope.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Plead my royal title, nourish hope. The first word
in the line has disappeared. <q>To</q> is required.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 129.&mdash;C.: Wanting the outer gloss.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Wanting the outward gloss.
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 153.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Bids me become a beggar. But complaints are weak</l>
<l>And womanish. I will like a palm-tree grow</l>
<l>Under my (own) huge weight.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MS.: Bids me become a beggar. But complaints</l>
<l>Are weak and womanish. I will, like a palm-tree,</l>
<l>Grow under my huge weight.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I., 1, 155.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 22'>Nor shall the fear</l>
<l>Of death or torture that dejection bring</l>
<l>Make me (or) live or die less than a king!</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
MS. has: To make me live or die less than a king!&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
<q>that</q> in 156 is the demonstrative, not the
relative.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 2.&mdash;C.: Keeps us at such (a) distance.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Keeps us off at such distance.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 20.&mdash;C.: Sans doubt, he's bent on mischief.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Sans doubt he's bent to mischief.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 24.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>He shall find I can</l>
<l>Think, and aloud too.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
MS.: Chant, and aloud too.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 53.&mdash;C.: 'T had perfected thy life.
</p>

<p>
MS.: It had.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 66.&mdash;C.: (to task). Not in MS. Traces of a word in
the beginning of a line now lost at the foot of 66.
</p>

<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>

<p>
I., 2, 67.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>If arrogantly you presume to take</l>
<l>The Roman government, your goddess cannot</l>
<l>Give privilege to it, and you'll find and feel</l>
<l>'Tis little less than treason, Flamen.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MS.: If arrogantly you presume to tax</l>
<l>The Roman government, you'll find and feel your goddess cannot</l>
<l>Give privilege to it, and you'll find and feel</l>
<l>'Tis little less than treason, Flamen.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q>You'll find and feel</q> cancelled in line 68&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,
the author changed his mind as he wrote.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 72.&mdash;C.: These Asiatic merchants whom you look on.
</p>

<p>
MS.: These Asiatic merchants whom you look upon.
</p>

<p>
<q>Merchants</q> added afterwards above the line,
and the first syllable of <q>upon</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 90.&mdash;C.: To it again.
</p>

<p>
MS.: To it again now.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 139.&mdash;C.: Yet you repine and rather choose to pay.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Yet you repined and rather chose to pay.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 151.&mdash;C.: And this is my last caution.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Since this is my last caution.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 161.&mdash;C.: (On) which.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Mutilated at beginning. <q>On</q> makes sense.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 186.&mdash;C.: His nose, his very lip.
</p>

<p>
MS.: His nose, his German lip. <q>German</q> scratched
out, and underneath appears a word beginning
with <q>A,</q> Asian or Austrian?<note place='foot'>See p. 180, n. 1, and <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Alchemist</hi>, IV., 1.</note> <q>Very</q> is
written above <q>German.</q>
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 187.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>His very hand, leg and foot!</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'>The moles upon</l>
<l>His face and hands.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MS.: His own (?) hand, leg and foot, and the left side</l>
<l>Shorter than on the right.</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 28'>The moles upon</l>
<l>His face and hands.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q>His own</q> down to <q>the right</q> is cancelled in MS.
</p>

<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>

<p>
I., 2, 191.&mdash;C:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>1 M. To confirm us, tell us your chirurgeon's name</l>
<l>When he served you.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>A.        You all knew him as I</l>
<l>Do you, Demetrius Castor.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 M.                      Strange.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3 M.                               But</l>
<l>Most infallibly true.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
MS.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>1 M.             To confirm us,</l>
<l>Tell us his name when he served you.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>A.                You all know him,</l>
<l>As I do you: Demetrius Castor.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>2 M.                           Strange.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>3 M. But most infallibly true.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In line 192 <q>his</q> has been altered to <q>the
chirurgeon's</q> to the detriment of the metre.
</p>

<p>
I., 2, 196.&mdash;C.: We'll pay for our distrust.
</p>

<p>
MS.: We sin in our distrust.
</p>

<p>
II., <hi rend='italic'>ad initium.</hi>&mdash;Stage-manager's note in left-hand margin, <q>Long.</q>
</p>

<p>
II., 1, 6.&mdash;C: I will exact
</p>

<p>
MS.: 'Twill exact.
</p>

<p>
II., 1, 47.&mdash;MS.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>We hold it fit you should have the first honour notice,</l>
<l>That you may have the honour to prevent it.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q>Honour</q> in 47 deleted.
</p>

<p>
II., 1, 51.&mdash;MS.: In the shape of King Antiochus.
Under King can be seen <q>Don Sebastian.</q>
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 45.&mdash;C: With due invitation, and remember.
</p>

<p>
MS.: With a due invitation and remember.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 49.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And though the Punic faith is branded by</l>
<l>Our enemies, our confederates and friends</l>
<l>And seventeen kings, our feodaries found it</l>
<l>As firm as fate.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MS.: And though the Punic faith is branded by</l>
<l>Our enemies, our confederates and friends</l>
<l>Found it as firm as fate, and seventeen kings</l>
<l>Our feodaries.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>

<p>
II., 2, 52.&mdash;MS.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Our strength at sea superior upon the sea</l>
<l>Exceeding theirs.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q>At sea superior</q> deleted. A clear case of the
author's alteration as he went.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 56.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>And then for our cavallery, in the champaign</l>
<l>How often have they brake their piles.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MS.: And then for our cavallery, how often, in the champaign</l>
<l>How they brake often have they brake their piles.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q>How often</q> in line 56. and the first <q>they
brake</q> deleted. Author's alterations again.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 59.&mdash;C.: If so we find it.
</p>

<p>
MS. If so, as we find it.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 67.&mdash;MS.: By yielding up a man.
</p>

<p>
Written over something of which the first words
are <q>in a,</q> the last word <q>king.</q>
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 98.&mdash;MS.: By the conquered Asiatics this impost in their hopes.
</p>

<p>
<q>This impost</q> deleted. <q>This impostor</q> occurs
just above in line 97.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 108.&mdash;C.: By her.
</p>

<p>
MS.: By his.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 138.&mdash;C.: He bears him like a king.
</p>

<p>
MS.: He bears himself like a king.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 142.&mdash;MS.: Ceutha deleted before Afric.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 165.&mdash;C.: Cannot near you.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Cannot hear you.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 205.&mdash;C.: Filled.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Filed.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 209.&mdash;MS.: And hath keeps a whore in Corinth.
</p>

<p>
<q>Hath</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 217.&mdash;MS.: In the royal monument of Hib the Asian kings.
</p>

<p>
(?) The author started to write <q>Hiberian kings.</q>
</p>

<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>

<p>
II., 2, 240.&mdash;MS.: Rebellion delivery or restoring.
</p>

<p>
<q>Rebellion</q> deleted; it occurred in the previous
line.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 253.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>With reverence to</l>
<l>This place, thou liest.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MS.: Setting aside, with reverence to</l>
<l>Thy place, the state, thou liest.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q>Setting aside</q> and <q>thy place</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 255.&mdash;C.: By being ...
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>MS.: By being libb'd, and my disability</l>
<l>To deflower thy sisters.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
II., 2, 256.&mdash;C.: I (bow to) your goddess.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Thank your goddess.
</p>

<p>
<q>Thy</q> deleted under <q>your.</q>
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 285.&mdash;MS.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Of brave and able men that might have stood</l>
<l>In opposition for the defence.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q>That might</q> down to <q>opposition</q> inserted
in same hand above the line.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 289.&mdash;C.: For my confed'rates.
</p>

<p>
MS.: For my confederates.
</p>

<p>
Required by metre.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 328.&mdash;MS.: Word deleted before Antiochus. Sebastian
would scan.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 335.&mdash;MS.: With your accustomed clemency wisdom you'll perceive.
</p>

<p>
<q>Clemency</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 346.&mdash;MS.: Such depositions as they pleased knew would make.
</p>

<p>
<q>Pleased</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 368.&mdash;MS.: Word deleted under <q>Carthage.</q> (?) Venice.
</p>

<p>
III., 1, 20.&mdash;MS.: <q>Europe</q> deleted under <q>Afric.</q>
</p>

<p>
III., 1, 22.&mdash;MS.: <q>To the good king Hiero</q> deleted under
<q>To the pro-consul Marcellus.</q>
</p>

<p>
III., 1, 47.&mdash;C.: You'll find there that they.
</p>

<p>
MS.: You shall find there that.
</p>

<p>
(A nominative is wanted; unless for <q>there</q>
we read <q>them</q>)
</p>

<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>

<p>
III., 1, 62.&mdash;C.: To my (aid).
</p>

<p>
MS.: To my wish.
</p>

<p>
III., 1, 91.&mdash;MS.: There's thy reward.
</p>

<p>
Underneath <q>there's,</q> <q>take</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
III., 1, 103.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Your travail's ended, mine begins; I take my leave.</l>
<l>Formality of manner now is useless.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MS.: Your travail's ended, mine begins, and therefore</l>
<l>Sans ceremonie I will take my leave.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
<q>Sans ceremonie</q> deleted, and <q>formality
... useless</q> added at the end of the line. The
author omitted to cancel <q>I take my leave.</q>
</p>

<p>
III., 2, 31.&mdash;C.: Thou thin gut!
</p>

<p>
MS.: You thin gut!
</p>

<p>
III., 2, 35.&mdash;MS.: Cancels from <q>Jove! if thou art</q> to 38,
<q>They come.</q>
</p>

<p>
III., 2, 36.&mdash;C.: Change not Jove's purpose.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Change not you Jove's purpose.
</p>

<p>
III., 2, 106.&mdash;MS.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>I will conjure him</l>
<l>If revenge hath any spells.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Cancelled in MS.
</p>

<p>
III., 3, 132.&mdash;C.: Will but&mdash;I spare comparisons.
</p>

<p>
(?) Punctuate: Will&mdash;but I spare comparisons.
</p>

<p>
III., 3, 150.&mdash;MS.: Of such such as are.
</p>

<p>
Second <q>such</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
III., 3, 151.&mdash;MS.: Bithynia covered with our knights armies.
</p>

<p>
<q>Knights</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
III., 3, 166.&mdash;MS.: And more than my his caution to you; but now peace or war.
</p>

<p>
<q>And more than my</q> deleted. The previous
line had begun with these words. Was the author
copying a former draft of the scene?
</p>

<p>
III., 3, 229.&mdash;C.: To cross your purpose.
</p>

<p>
MS.: To cross your purposes.
</p>

<p>
III., 3, 234.&mdash;MS.: The warrant and authority of a wife your queen.
</p>

<p>
<q>A wife</q> deleted.
</p>

<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>

<p>
III., 3, 244.&mdash;C.: These (eyes) pull'd out.
</p>

<p>
MS.: These pulled out.
</p>

<p>
<q>Eyes</q> is required by the sense, and <q>these</q>
and <q>eyes</q> are much alike in this hand.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>&mdash;C.: Do then.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Do you then.
</p>

<p>
III., 3, 248.&mdash;C.: Born deaf.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Born dumb.
</p>

<p>
Act IV.&mdash;Stage-manager's note in left-hand margin of 186,
<q>Long.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Act II.
</p>

<p>
IV., 1.&mdash;C.: A street in Callipolis.
</p>

<p>
Not in MS.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Sempronius a Capturion&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, <q>captain</q> altered to
<q>centurion.</q>
</p>

<p>
IV., 1, 2.&mdash;MS.: I heard such.
</p>

<p>
<q>Such</q> deleted. It begins the next line.
</p>

<p>
IV., 1, 5.&mdash;MS.: He promised me a visit, if his designs as I desire they may.
</p>

<p>
<q>He</q> deleted and <q>who by his letters</q>
written above it.
</p>

<p>
For similar expansion of one line into two,
<hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> II., 2, 285.
</p>

<p>
IV., 1, 7.&mdash;MS.: Till he arrive you behold him.
</p>

<p>
<q>He arrive</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
IV., 1, 23.&mdash;MS.: <q>My</q> deleted before <q>yourself.</q>
</p>

<p>
IV., 1, 29.&mdash;C.: Lips.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Lip.
</p>

<p>
IV., 1, 34.&mdash;C.: Tacks on <q>he</q> to this line.
</p>

<p>
MS.: <q>He</q> begins line 35.
</p>

<p>
IV., 1, 45.&mdash;Enter Flaminius.
</p>

<p>
(?) <q>Ferdinand</q> deleted below.
</p>

<p>
IV., 1, 90.&mdash;C.: And may prove fortunate.
</p>

<p>
MS.: And it may prove fortunate.
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 5.&mdash;C.: (Why), the sufferings of this miserable man.
</p>

<p>
MS.: No trace of <q>why.</q>
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 11.&mdash;C.: Tacks on <q>to</q> at the end.
</p>

<p>
MS.: It begins line 12.
</p>

<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>

<p>
IV., 2, 29.&mdash;C.: And know that not the reverence that waits.
</p>

<p>
MS.: And though I know the reverence that waits.
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 33.&mdash;C.: Or iron.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Or fire.
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 58.&mdash;C.: They aim at.
</p>

<p>
MS.: They aimed at.
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 60.&mdash;C.: A few more hours.
</p>

<p>
MS.: A few hours more.
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 66.&mdash;MS.: For the pretty tempting friend I brought; my life on't.
</p>

<p>
Under <q>tempting,</q> <q>beauty</q> (?) deleted.
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 87.&mdash;MS.: Crack not with the weight of deer, and far-fetched dainties.
</p>

<p>
<q>Not</q> spoils the metre and the sense; it occurs
in line 88. <q>Dispute not with heaven's bounties.</q>
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 90.&mdash;C.: Homely cakes.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Homely cates.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>IV., 2, 96.&mdash;MS.: I have already</l>
<l>Acquainted her with her cue. The music ushers</l>
<l>Her personal appearance.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Scratched out at top of 20<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>, and inserted at foot
of 20<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>.
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 127.&mdash;C.: Pray, what are you?
</p>

<p>
MS.: Pray you, what are you?
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 147.&mdash;C.: That, (sir), is.
</p>

<p>
MS.: <q>Sir</q> not visible owing to mutilation. (?) Sir,
that is.
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 158.&mdash;MS.: And met your wishes.
</p>

<p>
<q>And met</q> deleted before <q>and met.</q>
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 226.&mdash;MS.: To pluck your eyes out.
</p>

<p>
Last half of line deleted.  Last word (?)
<q>thoughtes.</q>
</p>

<p>
IV., 2, 228.&mdash;MS.: Add a deleted line:
</p>

<p>
Dieted with gourd water.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>The Sea Voyage</hi>, III. 1.</note> Oh! the furies!
</p>

<p>
C.: leaves out.
</p>

<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>

<p>
IV., 3, 1.&mdash;MS.: Officers leading in Berecinthius.
</p>

<p>
<q>Sampayo</q> deleted under <q>Berecinthius.</q>
</p>

<p>
C.: Place of execution at Callipolis.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Does not mention Callipolis.
</p>

<p>
IV., 3, 28.&mdash;MS.: My bark you see wants stowage.
</p>

<p>
<q>Balance</q> deleted before <q>stowage.</q>
</p>

<p>
IV., 3, 29.&mdash;C.: But give me half a dozen hens.
</p>

<p>
MS.: But give me half a dozen of hens.
</p>

<p>
IV., 3, 39.&mdash;MS.: <q>Helped me</q> <hi rend='italic'>bis.</hi> The first one deleted.
</p>

<p>
IV., 3, 44.&mdash;MS.: To make three sops for his three heads; may
serve for a breakfast.
</p>

<p>
<q>that</q> inserted after <q>heads,</q> and <q>something
more than an ordinary</q> after <q>serve for.</q>
One line converted into two, as above, IV., 1, 5.
</p>

<p>
IV., 3, 46.&mdash;MS.: The cur is vengeance devilish hungry.
</p>

<p>
<q>Vengeance</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
IV., 3, 48.&mdash;C.: Provided for my frame.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Provided for my fame.
</p>

<p>
IV., 3, 53.&mdash;MS.: That no covetous Roman, after I am dead.
</p>

<p>
<q>Needie</q> deleted under <q>covetous.</q>
</p>

<p>
IV., 4, 13.&mdash;C: His faults are inscribed.
</p>

<p>
MS.: His fault's inscribed.
</p>

<p>
IV., 4, 22.&mdash;C.: But in one thing most remarkable.
</p>

<p>
MS.: But one thing most remarkable.
</p>

<p>
IV., 4, 45.&mdash;MS.: Of kings deposed, and some in triumph led.
</p>

<p>
<q>Read</q> deleted before <q>led.</q>  It is the last
word of line 44.
</p>

<p>
IV., 4, 48.&mdash;C: Is of worse condition, and Rome.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Is of a worse condition, and Rome.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 28.&mdash;MS.: <q>rows</q> deleted before <q>is chained.</q>
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 98.&mdash;C: In the world.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Of the world.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 102.&mdash;C: Since I am term'd a soldier.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Since I am turn'd soldier.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 116.&mdash;C: Grant you like (opportunity, but why),
</p>

<p>
MS.: Grant you like;
</p>

<p>
C.'s addition required by the sense.
</p>

<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>

<p>
V., 1, 137.&mdash;C.: In which, my lord being a suitor with (me).
</p>

<p>
MS.: In which, my lord being a suitor with. Addition
required.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 143.&mdash;C.: And though it needs not, for further proof.
</p>

<p>
MS.: And though it needs it not, for further proof.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 157.&mdash;C.: They find.
</p>

<p>
MS.: May find.
</p>

<p>
<q>May</q> required by the sense.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 172.&mdash;MS.: Swim down the torrent stream but to
oppose the torrent.
</p>

<p>
<q>Torrent</q> before <q>stream</q> deleted.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 14.&mdash;C.: I will make this good.
</p>

<p>
MS.: I will mock this good.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 30.&mdash;C.: That noble Roman. By h(im you are sent for).
</p>

<p>
MS.: That noble Roman. By h.... Addition required.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 33.&mdash;C.: Though I grand him.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Though I grac'd him.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 46.&mdash;C.: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Antonius.</hi> Forbear.
</p>

<p>
MS.: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Marcellus.</hi> Forbear.
</p>

<p>
V.,2, 59.&mdash;MS.: <q>Marcell</q> deleted before <q>King Antiochus.</q>
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 124.&mdash;C.: (The armlet).
</p>

<p>
Koeppel points out that in Cayet it is a ring.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> 178, n. 6.</note>
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 125.&mdash;C.: Which you wear on your sl(eeve).
</p>

<p>
MS.: Which you wear on your&mdash;&mdash;slight traces of <q>sl.</q>
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 125.&mdash;C.: I ack(nowledge).
</p>

<p>
MS.: I ack ...
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 155.&mdash;C.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>My power to justify the ill, and pressed</l>
<l>You with mountainous promises of love and service.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>MS.: My power to justify the ill, and pressed you</l>
<l>With mountainous promises of love and service.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
V., 2, 166-7.&mdash;MS.: As far as <q>faithfully</q> in one line, but all
written at the same time.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 173.&mdash;C.: The violence of your passion.
</p>

<p>
MS.: .... l .. ce of your passion.
</p>

<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>

<p>
V., 2, 174.&mdash;C.: Cornelia. (Do) but (expre)ss.
</p>

<p>
MS.: Cornelia has a line which has disappeared; towards
the end are traces of <q>but</q> and <q>ss.</q>
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 175.&mdash;C.: Your thankfulness for his so m(any favours).
</p>

<p>
MS.: Your thankfulness for his so m ...
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 176.&mdash;C.: And labour that the senate may restore h(im).
</p>

<p>
MS.: And labour that the senate may restore h ... Addition
required.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 212.&mdash;C.: Yield an account without appeal for wha(t).
</p>

<p>
MS.: Yield an account without appeal for wha ...
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 213.&mdash;C.: You have already done. You may p(eru)se.
(Does it.)
</p>

<p>
MS.: You have already done. You may p ... se.
</p>

<p>
No need for <q>Does it.</q>
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 214.&mdash;C.: Do you f(i)nd I ha(ve).
</p>

<p>
MS.: Do you f ... nd e I ha ... Addition required.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 215.&mdash;C.: (The warran)t. (C)all in the Asian merchants.
</p>

<p>
MS.: ... all in the Asian marchants.
</p>

<p>
(?) <q>The document</q> would scan better.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 216.&mdash;C.: <hi rend='smallcaps'>2 Merchant.</hi> Now to be hanged.
</p>

<p>
MS. has space above 216 for half a line to be said by someone
else.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 217.&mdash;C.: <hi rend='smallcaps'>3 Merchant.</hi> Him that pities thee.
</p>

<p>
MS. gives no clue to the speaker.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ibid.</hi>&mdash;C.: Flaminius. Accusers.
</p>

<p>
MS.: ... sers. It is the last word of line 217?
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 218.&mdash;C.: ... die, and will prove that you took bribes.
</p>

<p>
I suggest as restoration of lines 215-218:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 16'>Call in the Asian merchants;</l>
<l>Let's hear them speak.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>1 Merchant</hi>:</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>'Tis thy turn now to be hanged.</l>
<l>And shame to him that pities thee.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Marc</hi>:</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 28'>Th' accusers</l>
<l>Are ready, and will prove, etc.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>

<p>
V., 2, 232.&mdash;C.: ('Tis) a Roman.
</p>

<p>
MS.: A Roman.
</p>

<p>
(C.'s addition required by the sense.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Prologue</hi>&mdash;1.&mdash;C.: (So far our) author.
</p>

<p>
MS.: ... author.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_IX'/>
<head>Appendix IX. <q>The Parliament Of Love</q></head>

<p>
The MS. (No. 39 in the Dyce Collection, Victoria and Albert
Museum) comprises nineteen leaves of the same size as those
of <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>. It has suffered much from damp, and
is in a brittle, dilapidated state. In several passages the MS.
has suffered since Gifford's collation (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, II., 2, 15). The
lacunae in the text&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, at I., 4, 55; I., 5, 7; and I., 5, 74&mdash;are
all caused by the mutilation of the lower edge of the MS.
The hand seems to be the same throughout, but bears no resemblance
to that in which <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi> is written, nor
is it so easy to decipher. There are very few corrections in the
text, and no marginal notes of any kind except the customary
entrances and departures of the characters, which are duplicated
as in <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, but in the same hand. The
licence on folio 19<hi rend='italic'>a</hi> has been cut off. On folio 19<hi rend='italic'>b</hi> is written
in a largish hand, <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi>, without any author's
name. Gifford believed that this MS. was in Massinger's
hand, and says <q>this has since been confirmed.</q> He does not
say how. One thing is certain; the same hand did not write
<hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>. One instance
out of many can be give in proof of this: the letter C, small
and capital, in <hi rend='italic'>The Parliament of Love</hi> is constantly written
thus, ⊕. A marked feature of the MS. is the doubling of
consonants&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, tollerable, vallor, quallities, cullors. It
looks as if, while it was in Gifford's hands, ink had been used
to restore letters here and there, and towards the end of the
play there are several substitutions of words in a later ink.
Gifford's collation where I have tested it is correct in the main
but I noted one or two mistakes&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>:
</p>

<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>

<p>
I., 5, 87.&mdash;MS.: Sudainely.
</p>

<p>
G.: Speedily.
</p>

<p>
II., 3, 58.&mdash;MS.: The graces from the Idalian greene [<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>].
</p>

<p>
G.: The Loves and Graces. This would make the line scan.
</p>

<p>
III., 2, 15.&mdash;MS.: If I compared it to an Indian slave's.
</p>

<p>
G.: with.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 158.&mdash;MS.: Have.
</p>

<p>
G.: Had.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 292.&mdash;<q>To</q> in MS. begins line 293.
</p>

<p>
The sort of mistake which we find in this MS. lends support
to two hypotheses, between which, as far as I can see, there is
nothing to decide; either, as we saw there was ground for
supposing in <hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, the author altered his diction
as he composed, or he was dictating to an amanuensis. The
earlier corrections are all made in the same ink. In favour
of the former hypothesis are such passages as the following:
</p>

<p>
I., 4, 84: <q>May you suc prosper.</q> <q>Succeed</q> was the original
word, but cancelled for one which scans better.
</p>

<p>
I., 5, 23: <q>Clarindore</q> cancelled at end of line, <q>Cleremond</q>
substituted. Clarindore is mentioned in the next line.
</p>

<p>
I., 5, 66: <q>Summer's sunne</q>: <q>heate</q> substituted for
<q>sunne.</q>
</p>

<p>
II., 1. 81: <q>That</q> deleted after <q>assurance</q>; the line thereby
runs more smoothly.
</p>

<p>
II., 3, 5: <q>Thy selfe</q>: <q>selfe</q> deleted before <q>strengthe.</q>
</p>

<p>
III., 2, 16: <q>That with incessant labour to searche out.</q>
After <q>labour</q> <q>searche</q> is deleted. In other words,
the construction is changed: the main verb being <q>dives</q>
in the next line, instead of the original intention,
<q>searches.</q>
</p>

<p>
III., 3, 124: <q>Perform'd</q> deleted before <q>expir'd.</q>
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 111: <q>In hell's most uglie cullors.</q> <q>Horrid coullors</q>
is deleted before the last two words.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 189: <q>Nor did I scorn</q>: <q>him</q> after <q>scorn</q> is
deleted, as if the syntax had been changed.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 206: <q>Acknowledged</q> deleted before <q>appointed.</q>
</p>

<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>

<p>
The sort of mistake that an amanuensis might make, either
in copying or by dictation, occurs in:
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 12: <q>The scorne darts of scorne</q>; first <q>scorne</q>
deleted.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 111: After <q>Absolve me</q> <q>only can</q> deleted; it
makes no sense, but had occurred in the previous line.
</p>

<p>
II., 3, 16: <q>But never thought: come, I must have thee mine.</q>
</p>

<p>
First three words deleted: they had occurred in the
previous line.
</p>

<p>
III., 1, 120: <q>Blanque</q> deleted before <q>blanket.</q>
</p>

<p>
III., 3, 37: <q>A seeming courts</q>: <q>courts</q> deleted before
<q>anger.</q> <q>Courtship</q> occurs at the end of the line.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 46: <q>Weake weake men</q>; first <q>weake</q> underlined
in later ink.<note place='foot'>For repetition of a word <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> II., 3, 51; III., 2, 31; III., 3,
105; IV., 5, 27, 45, 85, 98, 142.</note>
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 190: <q>For truth is truth is truth.</q> All deleted. The
sense requires: <q>for truth is truth.</q>
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 505: <q>Neglegt</q> deleted before <q>neglect.</q>
</p>

<p>
I add one or two notes of interest in correction of Cunningham's
edition.
</p>

<p>
II., 2, 156 should read thus, as in MS.:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'><q rend='pre'>then to practise</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>To find some means that he deserves thee best.</q><note place='foot'><p>The line would make better sense if it were emended thus:
</p>
<p>
I'll have no other penance <hi rend='italic'>than</hi> to practise,<lb/>
To find some means that he deserves thee best.
</p></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
C. reads in I., 157: <q>he that,</q> which makes no sense.
</p>

<p>
At III., 3, 8 (folio 8<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>) there is a considerable blank in the
MS. scrabbled over, but line 8 is completed at the top of
folio 9<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 116 should read thus, as in MS.: <q>And not to be replied
to.</q> C. misprints: <q>replied be.</q>
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 129: The MS. reads thus:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 30'>For that deitie</l>
<l>(Such our affection makes him) whose dread power</l>
<l>Tooke forthe choicest arrows, headed with</l>
<l>Not loose but loyall flames, who aymed at mee</l>
<l>Ame with greedie haste to meete the shaft.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>

<p>
C. reads line 131: ... the choicest arrow, headed with.
</p>

<p>
line 133: Who came with greedy haste to meet the shaft.
</p>

<p>
In 131 <q>the</q> is obviously left out by homoeoteleuton.
The grammar of the passage is defective. It is all cancelled
in the old ink.
</p>

<p>
Similarly, 138 is cancelled: <q>Of gold, nor of pale lead that
breeds disdain.</q>
</p>

<p>
178-185 down to the word <q>matter</q> are cancelled.
</p>

<p>
294-296 are cancelled in the old ink.
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 371: MS. <q>to whore me.</q> A modern hand has written
above <q>abuse.</q>
</p>

<p>
V., 1, 531: There is an addition in the original hand which will
not scan.
</p>

<lg>
<l><q>And gratious spectators.</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
Gifford in his note (II., 312) on <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi>, V., 1, 129,
refers to a corrected copy of <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>, which proves
the writing of the <hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love</hi> to be Massinger's.
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also Advertisement to his second edition, Vol. I., and the
facsimile of the dedication of <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi> to Sir Francis
Foljambe (IV., 593). Where is this copy now? It was at
one time in Gifford's possession.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_X'/>
<head>Appendix X. The Authorship Of <q>The Virgin Martyr</q></head>

<p>
Boyle assigns to Massinger, Act I., Act III., 1, 2, Act IV., 3,
Act V., 2, a total of slightly less than half the play. As far
as it goes, I agree with this assignation, but it does not seem
to me quite satisfactory. It is true that there are serious passages
in <hi rend='italic'>The Virgin Martyr</hi> which do not resemble the rest
of Massinger's work; it does not therefore follow that they are
due, like the comic parts, to Dekker. In the first place, the
exaltation which breathes from these passages may be due to
the rapture of youth. Why should Massinger not have shown
in what must have been a youthful work an emotional brilliancy
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
which he lost later? And secondly, it is a mistake
to say that Massinger's style is absolutely uniform; we could
only lay this proposition down positively if we had all his
works in our hands, and among those we possess I am much
mistaken if differences, slight though real, cannot be detected.
<hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>The Bashful Lover</hi> stand apart from the
rest of his plays by virtue of their greater degree of romantic
nobility. In the third place, the serious scenes assigned by
Boyle and others to Dekker do not seem to me to resemble
the serious style of that author, except that there are certain
passages where rhymed couplets are employed. Here again
we might argue that Massinger was making an experiment
which he dropped in his later work. The fact is that, as is
usually the case in these matters, we have not enough evidence
to prove one thing or the other.
</p>

<p>
The ascription of the play to Massinger and Dekker on the
title-page of the 1622 edition might be held to prove that the
lion's share in it is due to the former, especially when we remember
that he was the younger and presumably the less-known
author of the two. I should not, however, wish to
deny the possibility that Dekker contributed some of the
serious parts. I feel rather disposed to suggest that in one or
two of the scenes in question both authors were at work.
There is nothing impossible or improbable in this hypothesis.
</p>

<p>
Charles Lamb says about the scene between Dorothea and
Angelo, beginning Act II., 1, line 224, that <q>it has beauties of
so very high an order, that with all my respect for Massinger,
I do not think he had poetical enthusiasm capable of furnishing
them. His associate Dekker, who wrote <hi rend='italic'>Old Fortunatus</hi>,
had poetry enough for anything.</q> This is one of Lamb's
many unfair remarks about our author; he had discovered so
many treasures in the Elizabethan goldfield that he was disposed
to underrate the favourite of the eighteenth century.
One rises from a perusal of the works of Dekker with
a feeling that he was in many respects an engaging, child-like
mind, with a gift for drawing character, but with an imperfect
sense of technique and structure. If he had written
anything in his undoubted works as good as this scene, it
would be natural to adjudge it to him.
</p>

<p>
I should be inclined to assign II., 2, to Massinger; great
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
stress is laid in it on the lack of courtesy shown in scanty
greetings, which is a familiar line of thought in our author.
Theophilus' speech, <q>Have I invented tortures,</q> sounds to me
like Massinger. The structure of II., 3, reminds one of
several similar incidents in Massinger, though it is clear that
no poet can claim the monopoly of introducing auditors of
love-scenes in the gallery above the stage. On the other hand,
the ravings of Theophilus (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, 116-123) read like Dekker;
as does the rhymed passage (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, 131-136). Perhaps the
scene is composite.
</p>

<p>
The same remark applies to IV., 1. The first sixty lines
are certainly Massinger's, and much of the rest; notice especially
Antoninus' sudden change of mind at line 102. On the
other hand, the speech of the British slave (<hi rend='italic'>ibid.</hi>, 136-147)
might be Dekker's work.
</p>

<p>
If Massinger can be accredited with Dorothea's farewell
speech in IV., 3, 69-92, I do not see why he should not have
written the famous passage in II., 1. They seem to me to
have the same thrill of emotion.
</p>

<p>
Lastly, V., 1, seems to be constructed on the lines of a Massinger
scene, and to contain traces of his vocabulary; <hi rend='italic'>cf.</hi> the
use of <q>horror</q> in line 41, and of <q>to thy centre</q> in line
146. The conversion of Theophilus, like that of Antoninus
in a previous scene, is effected rapidly, in Massinger's manner.
</p>

<p>
To sum up, I should be inclined to say that Massinger had,
at any rate, a considerable share in the following scenes:
II., 1, II., 2, II., 3, IV., 1, V., 1.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_XI'/>
<head>Appendix XI. The Authorship Of <q>The Fatal Dowry</q></head>

<p>
Boyle assigns to Massinger, Act I.; Act III. as far as
line 315 (enter Novall, junr.); Act IV., 2, 3, 4; Act V. This
amounts to about three-fifths of the play. On metrical
grounds I reluctantly concede that Field wrote the famous
funeral scene, Act II., 1. But there are clear traces of Massinger's
style in the part of Act II., 2, which follows the prose
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
passage. Thus, Romont's speech, beginning at line 201,
seems to show traces of Massinger; likewise Pontalier's,
beginning at line 370. It is probable that Field wrote the
prose scenes in the play, and possibly the songs; nor would I
deny that the regular ten-syllable blank verse of such passages
as Act II., 2, 178-187 (<hi rend='smallcaps'>Rochfort.</hi> Why, how now,
Beaumelle? ... nothing but good and fit), and Act II.,
2, 318-328 (This is my only child ... were multiplied tenfold),
is Field's work. In the two plays which have come down
to us from Field there is much passable blank verse. It is
important to remember, however, that we have so little of
Field left that it is hazardous to base material tests on it;
and secondly, the authors may have collaborated in individual
scenes in such a way as to escape analysis. This is what
probably has taken place in Act II., 2. Nor do I feel certain
that the latter part of Act III. is wholly due to Field; lines
438-478 contain much that is like Massinger, though the ugly
line 464 is not in his style.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>I not accuse thy wife of act, but would</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Prevent her precipice to thy dishonour.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On the other hand, the rhymed couplet (lines 375-6) is probably
Field's.
</p>

<p>
The pert page in Act IV., 1, reminds us of a similar character
in <hi rend='italic'>Woman's a Weathercock</hi>, and is probably Field's handiwork.
On the other hand, Pontalier's speech in the same scene (lines
119-140) reads to me like Massinger.
</p>

<p>
These instances may serve to show how hard it is to dissect
the play satisfactorily.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_XII'/>
<head>Appendix XII. The Tragedy Of <q>Sir John Van Olden
Barnavelt</q></head>

<p>
This play is to be found in Bullen's <hi rend='italic'>Old Plays</hi>, vol. ii. It
was printed from B.M. Add. MSS. 18653, a folio of thirty-one
leaves in a small clear hand.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Bullen thinks that Massinger wrote III., 2; III., 6;
IV. (the trial scene); V., 1. He ascribes the concluding scene
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
to Fletcher. These ascriptions seem to me correct. There is
much fine poetry in the play, notably in the Leidenberg scene.
But Fleay goes too far when he calls the play <q>magnificent.</q>
It is a <q>piece of occasion,</q><note place='foot'>Mr. Bullen (vol. iv., App., p. 381) shows that the play was
produced in August, 1619, after some objections had been
raised to it by the Bishop of London.</note> written shortly after the tragic
death of Barnavelt, in such a way, however, that it would
not interest a later generation, who had forgotten the sensation
of the time. In the second place, it has no unity, a fact
no doubt partly due to the dual authorship. We do not know
if we are intended to sympathise with Orange or Barnavelt.
Such a specimen of the historical drama pure and simple
makes us feel that more than a mere narrative of events is
needed in a play; we look to the author to guide our sympathies,
and have a view of his own about his theme.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Old Plays</hi>, vol. ii., App. 2, contains much information
from Boyle about Massinger's style. <hi rend='italic'>Inter alia</hi>, he says,
<q>Fletcher as usual spoiled Massinger's fine conception of
Barnavelt, and made him whine like Buckingham in <hi rend='italic'>Henry
VIII</hi>.</q></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_XIII'/>
<head>Appendix XIII. <q>The Second Maiden's Tragedy</q></head>

<p>
This play was reprinted by the Malone Society in 1909.<note place='foot'>It is also to be found in Dodsley's <hi rend='italic'>Old English Plays</hi>, ed.
W. C. Hazlitt, 1875, vol. x.</note>
The writing of the original MS. in the British Museum is
remarkably good. It is No. 807 in the Lansdowne Collection,
and comes to us from the famous Warburton MSS. The play
was licensed by Sir George Buck, October 31st, 1611, and acted
by the King's men. At the end is inscribed: <q>by Thomas
Goffe,<note place='foot'>The name Goffe is so carefully obliterated that it is
uncertain; but it is curious to note that Goffe and Massinger
are in juxtaposition in the passage of <hi rend='italic'>Don Zara del Fogo</hi>
referred to <hi rend='italic'>supra</hi>, p. 77 n. 3.</note> George Chapman, by Will Shakspear. A tragedy
indeed!</q>
</p>

<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>

<p>
The last phrase is true. The first two names are erased;
the third name has been added by a late seventeenth or
eighteenth century hand.
</p>

<p>
The underplot, according to Boyle, is derived from Cervantes'
<hi rend='italic'>Curious Impertinent</hi>, and in Acts I. and II. passages <q>are
literally taken from that novel.</q> There is an incident at the
end of the play which reminds us of <hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>.
The <q>Tyrant</q> removes the body of the heroine from her
tomb, and sends for a painter to give colour to her face and
lips. Govianus, her husband, comes in disguise to do the deed,
and the Tyrant is killed by the poison which Govianus has put
on the lips of the corpse.
</p>

<p>
Massinger may therefore have known the play, but I
differ entirely from Boyle's estimate. He thinks Massinger
wrote Acts I. and II., Tourneur Acts III., IV., V. I see no
trace of Massinger in Act I., except the reference in line 541
to a <q>cup of nectar.</q> The sudden repentance of the heroine's
father Helvetius, in Act II., 1, 253, reminds us of a trait of
Massinger referred to above;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Supra</hi>, p. <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>.</note> but the style of the first two
acts is too feeble and vague, and the metre too halting for
him.<note place='foot'>Mr. Phelan (pp. 48-49) argues that this play is really the
lost play by Massinger, entitled <hi rend='italic'>The Tyrant</hi>. Tieck translated
the play as being by Massinger. Mr. P. Simpson has pointed
out to me that <hi rend='italic'>The Second Maiden's Tragedy</hi> is entered on
the Stationers' Register for September 9th, 1653, immediately
after several of Massinger's plays. He justly observes
that the juxtaposition is fortuitous.</note> I cannot suppose that at the age of twenty-seven
Massinger could have taken part in writing a play where <q>A
voice from within</q> the tomb says to the mourning husband,
<q>I am not here!</q><note place='foot'>Act IV., 4.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_XIV'/>
<head>Appendix XIV. <q>The Powerful Favorite</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Phelan, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, p. 3.</note></head>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>The Powerful Favorite</hi>, or the life of Aelius Sejanus, by
P. M., printed at Paris, 1628.</q> So runs the title in the
English translation.
</p>

<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>

<p>
Two translations of Pierre Matthieu's book, <q>Histoire
d'Aelius Sejanus,</q> appeared in the same year. One is padded
out with additions; in the shorter and more exact translation,
the initials on the title-page of the Bodleian copy have been
filled out thus: P. Massinger.
</p>

<p>
We know that Massinger's political sympathies were against
the Duke of Buckingham, and it is probable that a Life of
Sejanus may have attracted attention at a time when the parallel
was drawn and the unpopularity great; but it is simpler
to suppose that P. M. stands for the French author. It
would require some courage to publish under one's own name
or initials a translation of the book.
</p>

<p>
It is noteworthy that in 1632, after Buckingham's death,
a translation appeared by Sir T. Hawkins. The title which
he gave his book was <q>Unhappy prosperitie expressed in the
histories of Aelius Sejanus and Philippa, the Catanian.</q>
Underneath he adds the words: <q>Written in French by
P. Matthieu.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_XV'/>
<head>Appendix XV. <q>Double Falsehood</q></head>

<p>
In 1728 there appeared at London a play with the following
title: <q>Double Falsehood, or The Distressed Lovers;
written originally by W. Shakespeare, and now revised and
adapted to the stage by Mr. Theobald, the author of <hi rend='italic'>Shakespeare
Restor'd</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
It was dedicated to the Rt. Hon. George Dodington, Esq.
In the Preface Theobald states that one of the copies in MS.
is of above sixty years' standing. He goes on to say that
there is a tradition that Shakspere wrote it&mdash;<q>in the time of
his retirement from the stage.</q> The story is taken from a
novel in <hi rend='italic'>Don Quixote</hi>, which appeared in 1611, five years before
Shakspere's death. Theobald professes to allow that the
colouring, diction, and characters come nearer to the style
and manner of Fletcher.
</p>

<p>
Some writers<note place='foot'>Sir A. W. Ward (II., 528<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>) seems disposed to assign it to
Shirley.</note> have supposed that Theobald in compiling
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
this play used materials from a lost play by Massinger. The
first thing we notice in it is that there are a good many prose
scenes. This is unlike Massinger. In the second place,
the metre is unlike Massinger's; it is simple and regular,
and contains very few double endings or run-on lines. In
Act II., 4, Leonora gives an important letter to her lover
Julio, out of a window, to a <q>citizen</q> whom she does not know,
by night. Is this improbable incident the sort of thing that
Massinger would write?<note place='foot'>Compare this with the scene in Ford's <hi rend='italic'>'Tis Pity She's a
Whore</hi> where Annabella gives the Friar a letter from an upper
window.</note>
</p>

<p>
The whole play is an eighteenth-century effusion in the
manner of Rowe. There is no trace of Fletcher or Massinger
here.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_XVI'/>
<head>Appendix XVI. Middleton's <q>A Trick To Catch The Old One</q></head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Trick to catch the Old One</hi> is a lively play, mainly written
in prose, in which an air of plausibility is skilfully cast around
a farcical plot. There can be no doubt that Massinger borrowed
the idea of <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi> from Middleton, as well as a few expressions.<note place='foot'><p>Compare <hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi>, I., 1:
</p>
<p>
What trick is not an embryon at first?
</p>
<p>
<q>Embryon</q> is a favourite word of Massinger's.
</p>
<p>
I., 1: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Witgood.</hi> I shall go nigh to catch that old fox,
mine Uncle; though he make but some amends for my undoing,
yet there's some comfort in't, he cannot otherwise
choose, though it be but in hope to cozen me again, but supply
any hasty want that I bring to town with me.
</p>
<p>
II., 1: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Lucre.</hi> There may be hope some of the widow's
lands too may one day fall upon me if things be carried wisely.</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, IV., 1, 77:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Overreach.</hi>                 'Tis not alone<lb/>
The Lady Allworth's land, for these once Wellborn's,<lb/>
As by her dotage on him I know they will be,<lb/>
Shall soon be mine.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi>, I., 2: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Witgood.</hi> Thou knowest I have a wealthy
uncle, i' th' city, somewhat the wealthier for my follies.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi>, I., 3: <hi rend='smallcaps'>Hoard.</hi> Thou that canst defeat thy own
nephew, Lucre, lay his lands into bonds, and take the extremity
of thy kindred's forfeitures.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, I., 1, 48:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Tapwell.</hi> Which your uncle, Sir Giles Overreach, observing<lb/>
(Resolving not to lose a drop of them)<lb/>
On foolish mortgages, statutes, and bonds,<lb/>
For a while supplied your looseness, and then left you.
</p>
<p>
II., 1, 81:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Overreach.</hi> And 'tis my glory, though I come from the city,<lb/>
To have their issue whom I have undone,<lb/>
To kneel to mine as bondslaves.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi>, II., 1: Lucre. You've a fault, nephew; you're a
stranger here; well, heaven give you joy.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, III., 2, 276:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Overreach.</hi> My nephew!<lb/>
He has been too long a stranger; faith you have!<lb/>
Pray, let it be mended.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi>, III., 1: I would forswear ... muscadine and eggs
at midnight.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, IV., 2, 84:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Creditor.</hi> Your worship broke me<lb/>
With trusting you with muscadine and eggs.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi>, IV., 4: Hoard's anticipations of his future pomp
may have suggested the thoughts which Sir Giles entertains
about his daughter's future estate when married to Lord Lovel.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, IV., 3, 130-141.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi>, IV., 5:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sir Launcelot.</hi> I would entreat your worship's device in a just and honest cause, sir.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Dampit.</hi> I meddle with no such matters.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi>, II., 1, 23:
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Overreach.</hi> The other wisdom,<lb/>
That does prescribe us a well-governed life,<lb/>
And to do right to others, as ourselves,<lb/>
I value not an atom.
</p></note>
In both plays there are an uncle who has strained
the law to deprive his nephew of his lands, a rich widow whose
supposed affection for the nephew converts the uncle to make
reparation, and creditors who have to be satisfied. The servants
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
(<hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi>, IV., 4) who are to discharge their duties in
Hoard's new household may have suggested the group in
Lady Allworth's house who supply a comic element. On the
other hand, the two plays are constructed on very different
lines. The central point of <hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi> is the hatred of the two
usurers, Lucre and Hoard, for one another, both being in the
end cheated by the hero Witgood. In <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi> there is
only one usurer, Sir Giles. <hi rend='italic'>A Trick</hi>, though well constructed,
has a lame and hurried conclusion; and it is overloaded with
minor characters, who help the action but little&mdash;in particular,
the usurer Dampit seems to be introduced for no particular
reason except to fill up the time with mediocre fun. The part
played by the heroine, Joyce, is small and obscure. Then
again, there can be no comparison between the slight figure of
Hoard and the powerful creation of Sir Giles Overreach.
Wellborn does nothing in the play that misbecomes a gentleman;
the ingenuity with which he frames a plan to deceive
his uncle leads us to believe that when he has repented his
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
wild life he has the capacity to make good. His prototype,
Witgood, on the other hand, is merely an amusing adventurer.
Indeed, Middleton seems throughout to be pursuing with his
vengeance the sharp practices of those who lend money to fast
young men, and we certainly sympathize with his castigation
of Lucre, Hoard, and Dampit. Massinger's widow is a lady
of birth and title; Middleton's is a courtesan in disguise.
When she marries Hoard, though we feel some satisfaction
at the deception which has been practised on him, we cannot
help asking ourselves as the characters retire to the conventional
<q>wedding dinner</q> of an Elizabethan comedy, whether
the solution would have worked in real life. The answer is,
that while we have been much amused, we have been cheated
by the author's great skill and vivacity into accepting an
improbable plot. Massinger's play, on the other hand, contains
little that might not have happened, and the conclusion
is so arranged that there is every prospect of the characters
living happily hereafter. While Middleton's play is a charming
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
extravaganza, Massinger's has held the stage ever since.
The one play can be acted now, the other cannot. This is
not merely due to the fact that <hi rend='italic'>A New Way</hi> has more dignity
and refinement than its predecessor, but it is because Massinger's
characters behave like real beings.<note place='foot'>Compare the way in which Massinger, in <hi rend='italic'>The Great Duke
of Florence</hi>, transfers to Italy <hi rend='italic'>A Knacke to Know a Knave</hi>.
(Hazlitt's <hi rend='italic'>Dodsley</hi>, vi.)</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_XVII'/>
<head>Appendix XVII</head>

<p>
These two poems are copied from a folio MS. in the library
of Trinity College, Dublin (G, 2, 21), containing compositions
of Donne and other poets of the seventeenth century. They
are to be found on pages 554-559. The handwriting is that of
the seventeenth century. I have reproduced the original
punctuation and spelling. Mr. Grosart published the poems
in <hi rend='italic'>Englische Studien</hi>, No. xxvi. He says that the librarian of
Trinity, Dr. T. K. Abbot, had grounds for supposing that the
MS. had been in the possession of Trinity College for a century;
he does not, however, state what the grounds are. As far as
the dates go which are indicated in the volume, it might have
passed into the library with other books from Archbishop
Ussher's collection.
</p>

<p>
From the tone of line 16 of the first poem we may assume
that it was addressed by Massinger when quite young to
William, the third Earl of Pembroke.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
I
</p>

<p>
The Copie of a Letter written upon
occasion to the Earle of Pembrooke
Lo: Chamberlaine
</p>

<lg>
<l>My Lord</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>p. 554</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soe subiect to the worser fame</l>
<l>Are even the best that clayme a Poets name:</l>
<l>Especially poore they that serve the stage</l>
<l>Though worthily in this Verse-halting Age.</l>
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
<l>And that dread curse soe heavie yet doth lie</l>
<l>W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> the wrong'd Fates falne out w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> Mercurie</l>
<l>Pronounc'd for ever to attend upon</l>
<l>All such as onely dreame of Helicon.</l>
<l>That durst I sweare cheated by selfe opinion</l>
<l>I were Apolloes or the Muses Mynion       10</l>
<l>Reason would yet assure me, 'tis decreed</l>
<l>Such as are Poets borne, are borne to need.</l>
<l>If the most worthy then, whose pay's but praise</l>
<l>Or a few spriggs from the now withering bayes</l>
<l>Grone underneath their wants what hope have I</l>
<l>Scarce yet allowed one of the Company&mdash;        16</l>
</lg>

<p>
p. 555
</p>

<lg>
<l>When<note place='foot'>Lines in another hand inserted in a space left blank at the
top of p. 555.</note> thou sighst, thou sigh'st not wind, but sigh'st my soule away</l>
<l>When thou weep'st unkindly kind, my lifes blud doth decay</l>
<l>It cannot bee</l>
<l>That thou lov'est mee as thou sai'est, if in thine my life thou wast,</l>
<l>Thou art the best of mee.<note place='foot'>Marginal note in a third hand.</note></l>
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
<l>In some high mynded Ladies grace to stand</l>
<l>Ever provided that her liberall hand       30</l>
<l>Pay for the Vertues they bestow upon her</l>
<l>And soe long shees the miracle and the honor</l>
<l>Of her whole Sex, and has forsooth more worth</l>
<l>Then was in any Sparta e're brought forth</l>
<l>But when the Bounty failes a change is neare</l>
<l>And shee's not then what once shee did appeare</l>
<l>For the new Giver shee dead must inherit</l>
<l>What was by purchase gott and not by merit</l>
<l>Lett them write well that doo this and in grace</l>
<l>I would not for a pension or A place       40</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Part soe w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> myne owne Candor, lett me rather        p. 556</l>
<l>Live poorely on those toyes I would not father</l>
<l>Not knowne beyond A Player or A Man</l>
<l>That does pursue the course that I have ran</l>
<l>Ere soe grow famous: yet w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> any paine</l>
<l>Or honest industry could I obteyne</l>
<l>A noble Favorer, I might write and doo</l>
<l>Like others of more name and gett one too</l>
<l>Or els my Genius is false. I know</l>
<l>That Johnson much of what he has does owe         50</l>
<l>To you and to your familie, and is never</l>
<l>Slow to professe it, nor had Fletcher ever</l>
<l>Such Reputation, and credit nonne</l>
<l>But by his honord Patron, Huntington</l>
<l>Unimitable Spencer ne're had been</l>
<l>Soe famous for his matchlesse Fairie Queene</l>
<l>Had he not found a Spencer Sydney to preferr [<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>]</l>
<l>His plaine way in his Shepheards Calender</l>
<l>Nay Virgills selfe (or Martiall does lye)</l>
<l>Could hardly frame a poore Gnatts Elegie        60</l>
<l>Before Mecænas cherisht him; and then</l>
<l>He streight conceiv'd Æneas and the men</l>
<l>That found out Italic Those are Presidents<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>I.e.</hi>, precedents.</note></l>
<l>I cite w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> reverence: my lowe intents</l>
<l>Looke not soe high, yet some worke I might frame</l>
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
<l>That should nor wrong my duty nor your Name.      p. 557</l>
<l>Were but your Lo<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>pp</hi> pleas'd to cast an eye</l>
<l>Of favour on my trodd downe povertie</l>
<l>How ever I confesse myselfe to be</l>
<l>Ever most bound for your best charitie      70</l>
<l>To others that feed on it, and will pay</l>
<l>My prayers w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> theirs that as y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>u</hi> doe y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>u</hi> may</l>
<l>Live long, belov'd and honor'd doubtles then</l>
<l>Soe cleere a life will find a worthier Penn.</l>
<l>For me I rest assur'd besides the glory</l>
<l>T'wold make a Poet but to write your story.    76</l>
</lg>

<p>
Phill: Messinger.
</p>

<p>
p. 557
</p>

<p>
II
</p>

<lg>
<l>A New yeares Guift presented to my</l>
<l>Lady and M:<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>rs</hi> the then Lady</l>
<l>Katherine Stanhop now Countesse</l>
<l>of Chesterfield.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>By Phill: Messinger.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Madame</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Before I ow'd to you the name</l>
<l>Of Servant, to your birth, your worth your fame</l>
<l>I was soe, and t'was fitt since all stand bound</l>
<l>To honour Vertue in meane persons found</l>
<l>Much more in you, that as borne great, are good</l>
<l>W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> is more then to come of noble blood</l>
<l>Or be A Hastings; it being too well knowne</l>
</lg>

<p>
p. 558
</p>

<lg>
<l>An Empresse cannot challenge as her oune</l>
<l>Her Grandsires glories; And too many staine</l>
<l>W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> their bad Actions the noble straine        10</l>
<l>From whence they come. But as in you to be</l>
<l>A branch to add fresh honor to the tree</l>
<l>By vertue planted, and adorne it new</l>
<l>Is graunted unto none or very few</l>
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
<l>To speake you further would appeare in me</l>
<l>Presumption or a servants flattery</l>
<l>But there may be a tyme when I shall dare</l>
<l>To tell the world and boldly what y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>u</hi> are</l>
<l>Nor sleight it Madame, since what some in me</l>
<l>Esteeme a blemish, is a guift as free                20</l>
<l>As their best fortunes, this tooke from the grave</l>
<l>Penelopies chastitie, and to it gave</l>
<l>Still living Honors; this made Aiax strong</l>
<l>Ulisses wise: such power lies in a Song</l>
<l>W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> Phaebus smiles on, w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>ch</hi> can find noe Urne</l>
<l>While the Sea his course, or starrs observe their turne</l>
<l>Yet 'tis not in the power of tinckling Rime</l>
<l>That<note place='foot'>To take.</note> takes rash iudgments and deceive the tyme</l>
<l>W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> Mountebanke showes a worke that shold indure</l>
<l>Must have a genius in it, strong, as pure          30</l>
<l>But you beginne to smile, as wondring why</l>
<l>I should write thus much to y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>u</hi> now since I</l>
<l>Have heretofore been silent may y<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>u</hi> please</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 42'>To know</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>To know the course it is noe new disease      p. 559</l>
<l>Groune in my iudgment, nor am I of those</l>
<l>That thinke good wishes cannot thrive in prose</l>
<l>As well as Verse: but that this New yeares day</l>
<l>All in their loves and duties, what they may</l>
<l>Present unto you; though perhaps some burne</l>
<l>W<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> expectation of a glad returne            40</l>
<l>Of what they venture for. But such I leave</l>
<l>To their deceiptfull guifts given to deceive</l>
<l>What I give I am rich in, and can spare</l>
<l>Nor part for hope w<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>th</hi> ought deserves my care</l>
<l>He that hath little and gives nought at all</l>
<l>To them that have is truly liberall.        46</l>
</lg>
</quote>

</div>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_XVIII'/>
<head>Appendix XVIII. Alliteration In Massinger</head>

<p>
The art with which Massinger employs alliteration escapes
all but the most careful perusal; but once noticed, it attracts
attention as one of his favourite expedients. Perhaps the
best way to exemplify its use is to give a complete collection
of instances from one of the plays: I take for this purpose
<hi rend='italic'>The Unnatural Combat</hi>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I., 1, 150: Impartial judges, and not sway'd with spleen.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  158: Not lustful fires, but fair and lawful flames.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  189: Our goods made prize, our sailors sold for slaves.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  217:                          He that leaves</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 14'>To follow as you lead, will lose himself.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  286: Their lives, their liberties.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  308: Both what and when to do, but makes against you.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  309: For had your care and courage been the same.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  342: He may have leave and liberty to decide it.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>II., 1,  14: With my best curiousness and care observed him.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   23: A sudden flash of fury did dry up.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   94: But dare and do, as they derive their courage.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  143: In a moment raz'd and ruin'd.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  157: In one short syllable yield satisfaction.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  170: With scorn on death and danger.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  177: But what is weak and womanish, thine own.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  183: As a serpent swoll'n with poison.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  226: Marseilles owes the freedom of her fears.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  241: That will vouchsafe not one sad sigh or tear.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  267: And with all circumstance and ceremony.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>II., 3,  67: Nor should you with more curiousness and care.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 1,  10: It being a serious and solemn meeting.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   17: I'll undertake to stand at push of pike.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   21: When the dresser, the cook's drum, thunders,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'>Come on!</l>
</lg>

<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>

<lg>
<l>III., 1, 23: As tall a trencher-man.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   32: The only drilling is to eat devoutly</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>And to be ever drinking.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   57: Delay is dangerous.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   88: Continue constant</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>To this one suit.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   90: Every cast commander.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  100: And so by consequence grow contemptible.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  117: For his own sake, shift a shirt!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 2, 46: The colonels, commissioners, and captains.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   78: That losing her own servile shape and name.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   85: Believe my black brood swans.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   95: As I have heard, loved the lobby.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  150: Of her fair features, that, should we defer it.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  160: And serves as a perpetual preface to.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 3, 43: The curiousness and cost on Trajan's birthday.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   78: I've charged through fire that would have singed your sables.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   82: Such only are admired that come adorn'd.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"   93: Does make your cupboards crack.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  114: For want of means shall, in their present payment.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  149: With my son, her servant.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 4, 89: And he shall find and feel, if he excuse not.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>IV., 1, 53: And liked and loath'd with your eyes, I beseech you.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  91: A loathsome leprosy had spread itself.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 101: Sir, you have liked and loved them, and oft forc'd.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 119: My ranks of reason.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 132: Thy virtues vices.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 133: Far worse than stubborn sullenness and pride.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 206: In your fame and fortunes.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>IV., 2, 47: Against my oath, being a cashier'd captain.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>"  68: Your lords</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 11'>Of dirt and dunghills.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 118: My corslet to a cradle.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 120: Or to sell my sword and spurs, for soap and candles?</l>
</lg>

<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>

<p>
IV., 2. 135: Fair France is proud of.
</p>

<p>
    "   148: Such as have power to punish.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 35: Or our later laws forbid.
</p>

<p>
    "  38: And solemn superstitious fools prescribe.
</p>

<p>
    "  57: Into some close cave or desert.
</p>

<p>
    "  58: Our lusts and lives together.
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 165: But to have power to punish, and yet pardon,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 11'>Peculiar to princes.</l>
</lg>

<p>
    " 248: Accuse or argue with me.
</p>

<p>
    " 307: To season my silks.
</p>
</quote>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<anchor id='Appendix_XIX'/>
<head>Appendix XIX</head>

<p>
By the kindness of Mr. Edmund Gosse I have been enabled
to examine and collate the manuscript notes in copies of the
first quartos of the following plays in his possession: <hi rend='italic'>The Duke
of Milan</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The
Maid of Honour</hi>. The dates of these quartos range from
1623 to 1632. The poet Swinburne had no doubt that the
manuscript notes were due to Massinger himself; the resemblance
of the handwriting is certainly indubitable, but
as we have no other evidence than that of the corrections
themselves, we are forced to be content with the conclusion
that the insertions are of a contemporary date. I take the
plays in the above order.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Duke of Milan</hi>
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 23.&mdash;This, the last line on the page, has suffered from
the binding, and is written in the margin.<note place='foot'>In the Malone copy in the Bodleian line 23 has disappeared,
and at the end of line 22 rather less of the letters
is preserved than at the beginning.</note>
</p>

<p>
I., 1, 56.&mdash;The same thing has happened here.
</p>

<p>
In both cases the writing resembles that of the poet. It
may be argued, on the other hand, that it is unlikely that the
play should have suffered so soon from binding; it is, however,
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
of course not impossible that the eight plays were bound up
together shortly after the year 1632.
</p>

<p>
V., 2, 203.&mdash;Forza. S. inserted before F. (So <hi rend='italic'>infra</hi>, 218,
234, 256.)
</p>

<p>
At the end of the play occurs a symbol M which might
represent the poet's initial.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Bondman</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>I., 1: Timagorus bis in stage-directions,      us corrected to as</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 7'>and also in</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 7'>I., 1,5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I., 1,   37: I love                            live</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I., 2,   2:  I cannot brooke with              this</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>gadding</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I., 3,   83: As to the supreame Magistrates    Sicilie</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>surely tenders</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 3'>"    161: And yet the chu                   rl added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 3'>"    181: made glorious by Achon            Action</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 3'>"    182: gave warrant to her               ailes added</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>couns</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 3'>"    183: hand                              heard</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 3'>"    206: nor defence                       noe</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 3'>"    295: ? at end                          ? deleted</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 3'>"    319: of slaves                         our</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>II., 1,   71:     fam'd                       fann'd</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"    87:     vayle                       y deleted</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   144:     loose both sent and         th  inserted  after</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 19'>beauty                      <q>loose,</q> and c in</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 47'><q>sent</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   153:     owe                         awe</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>II., 2,   16:     manners; yet this morning   for</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"    57:     cunning                     coḿinge</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"    62:                                 ? added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>III., 3,  99:    too too large                second <q>too</q> deleted</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   135:    leave her off                stand her of</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   165:    during                       daring</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>III., 4,  29:    Timandra                     Timag</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"    51:    cares                        feares</l>
</lg>

<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>

<lg>
<l>IV., 1,   21: still                            you</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>IV., 2, 128: when                             where</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  140:                                  <q>Pray you, leave mee</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 48'>added at end to complete</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 48'>the line</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>IV., 3, 145: tempter                           second t deleted</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>V., 3,   9: not be deni'de                   to inserted before <q>be</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   38: howsoere the fortune             thy</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  103: gods and fautors                 his</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  193:                                  ) inserted after devices</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  245:                                  Gra. inserted at beginning</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 49'>of line, (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 49'>Graccho)</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
All these corrections are manifestly right, except possibly
III., 3, 135 and IV., 1, 21. The addition in IV., 2, 140, though
not especially appropriate to the situation, presents us with a
type of line much favoured by Massinger.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I., 1,   6: stocke                           socc (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, sock)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   25:                                  parenthesis inserted</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 47'>after <q>vice</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   37: gald                             l</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   44: The Catta and the Dacie          Catti ... Daci</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   46: Jove hasten it                   ? added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   49: we obey you                      full stop added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   51: the sceane                       Scaene</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   79: is to eb<note place='foot'>The misprint is in the original.</note> guilty               bee</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  115: grieve                           greive (<q>give</q> is required</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 49'>by the sense)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I., 2:      Enter Domitia and Parthenius     <q>with a letter</q> added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I., 2,  33: for to be thankfull              I woulde</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   44: his plea                         its</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   86: new workes that dare not         Monarches. Pa: added,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 16'>do                               (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, Parthenius)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   88: Parth. Will you dispute          Parth. deleted and ?</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 48'>added.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I., 3,  44:                                  (  ) added</l>
</lg>

<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>

<lg>
<l>I., 3, 53-4:                       ( ) added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 67: condemne                 condemnd</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 78: which                    with</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 78: redde (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, read)       ) added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 86: Cancillus                Camillus</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>I., 4, 13: Fulcinius and prisoners  <q>and</q> deleted</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 11'>led by him</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>II., 1, 4: yours                   ; added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 16: though                  ( added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 21: purple                  ! added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 22: my heyre                ? added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 182-3:                      (  ) added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 217: promped                prompted</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 372:                        (  ) added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 386:                        (  ) added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 1, 30: words                 swordes</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 52: retch                 reach</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 58: the mortall powers    iḿortall</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 78: tyrannie              tyrant</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 163: steepie              steep</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 205:                      ! added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>IV., 1, 8: I thinke not           <q>not</q> deleted, and</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 34'>added after <q>respects</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 34'>in 9</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 95: compliant              complaint</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 149:                       ? added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>IV., 2, 12: lesse;                  ; deleted</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 27: pe                      bee</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 28: you command to me       ever you coḿand me</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 39: tremele                 tremble</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 44: geeat                   great</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 70: Hypollitus              one l substituted</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 123: express thee           stop added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>" 127: To render me that was  ( ) added before</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 12'>before I hugg'd thee   <q>that</q> and</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 12'>An adder in my bosome  <q>before,</q> and after</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 35'><q>thee</q> and</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 35'><q>bosome</q></l>
</lg>

<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>

<lg>
<l>IV., 2, 130: Thy pomp and pride&mdash;      163 Perpetual vexation</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 14'>shall not fall.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>Note at top of p. 31<hi rend='italic'>b</hi>:   <q rend='pre'>This page follows the</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 15'><q rend='post'>later.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>Note at top of p. 32<hi rend='italic'>a</hi>:    <q>This page misplac'd.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 182: would                       coulde</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 190: the iu ice                  st inverted inserted</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 41'>here between <q>iu</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 41'>and <q>ice</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 191: had with h inverted         had</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 196: if                          yf</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 229: act                         are</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 242: grim death                  <q>grim</q> deleted</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 295:                             ( ) added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>V., 1, 115: assure                    as sure</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 142: still'd                     stil'd</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>" 228: pinn'd                      pinion'd</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>V., 2, 22: iumpe                      impe</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 3'>" 78: this murther                  'tis</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 3'>" 85: to sentence                   her inserted after <q>to</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
I have compared the Malone quarto in the Bodleian
Library and find that the mistakes are identical. In other
words, <hi rend='italic'>The Roman Actor</hi> was carelessly printed. Nearly all
the corrections made, alike of sense and punctuation, are improvements.
The emendation at IV., 2, 28 reads like one
made by the author. On the other hand, a careful study of
IV., 2, 127 will reveal the fact that the writer's sense has been
mistaken, and the omission of <q>grim</q> in IV., 2, 242 spoils
the rhythm. The curious thing is that the play is full of
misprints, which have not been corrected&mdash;<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, III., 2, 143,
Anaxerete (and in several other lines); line 154, <q>Epethite,</q>
for <q>epithet</q>; 258, Heccuba. Take again IV., 2, 181: An e
is inverted and not corrected; 188, <q>bttchered</q> stands for
<q>butchered</q>; and 189, <q>lacriledge</q> for <q>sacrilege.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Renegado</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>I., 3, 159: receive least losse       <q>the</q> inserted after</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 41'><q>least.</q> It spoils the</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 41'>metre</l>
</lg>

<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>II., 5,  46: up to the bre a c          breache</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"                                  ? added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 3,   1: I will                      'Twill</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   89: like a neighing gennet to   mare to her proud</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 14'>her stallion                stallion</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 5, 114: well made galley          mann'd</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>IV., 1, 114: witnesse of my change     <q>of</q> deleted: <q>good</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 40'>inserted after <q>my</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>V., 2,  79:                           Franci. inserted (=</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 42'>Francisco)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>V., 3, 111:                           Vitelli inserted</l>
</lg>
</quote>


<p>
III., 3, 89 reads like an author's emendation. On the other
hand, the alteration in IV., 1, 114 is not in Massinger's style.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Picture</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l>Line 37, Poem by T. Jay:</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 13'>of to heare                or</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  38: write neere                writ</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  40: admir'd                    admire</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I., 1, 31: satisfie                   satietie</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  40:                            ( ) added</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  53: If I am so rich or         Sir</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 120: wone him                   o inserted after <q>o</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 154: wracke                     w deleted</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 190: ere the fight begun        s added after <q>fight</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 42'>(=is)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I., 2, 13: bravel                     ye added</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  71: but                        deleted and added</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 42'>again in margin</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 170: examp                      le added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>II., 1, 82: A post.                    deleted</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  83:                            <q>Aside.  A Post.</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 41'>added in margin</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>II., 2, 98: <q>In one here</q> printed      <q>In one here</q> deleted</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 12'>in a separate line after     (<hi rend='italic'>vide</hi> Gifford)</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 12'>this line</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 103: resolve                    s added</l>
</lg>

<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>

<lg>
<l>II., 2, 103: lords of her, like            acres</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  174: fierce dame                   n inserted before <q>m.</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 45'>dame=dam</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  255: solder                        soldier</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 5'>"  260: tosses                        trifles</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here it will be noted that two good emendations are made&mdash;I.,
1, 53 and II., 2, 103. On the other hand, no notes are
made on the last three acts: such a misprint as <q>ijgobobs</q>
in V., 3, 161 escaping comment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Fatal Dowry</hi>
</p>

<p>
Nil.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Emperor of the East</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I., 1,  83: musicke?                     ? deleted, and <q>Sir?</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 45'>added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>I., 2, 169: too                          to</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  178: Constantinople               courte</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  242: them feare                   their</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  291: care                         feare</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  323: Nimph                        Umph</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  347: wooned                       d deleted</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>II., 1, 114: in knowledge                 <q>the</q> inserted after</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 45'><q>in</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 2,  62:                              ( ) added</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   93: heaven is most gratious      <q>to you</q> deleted</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 16'>to you, madam</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 111: with a kinde impotence        <q>of</q> inserted after</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 45'><q>kinde</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 138: I speak it                    ) added</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 139: I                             I (so III., 4, 145, 163;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 45'>IV., 1, 13)</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>" 199: ransone                       m</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>III., 4, 19: how .sister:                  !! added</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  29: str                           stirre</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  44: beg pardon                    a inserted after <q>beg</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  60: my pity                       t added above <q>t</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  80:                               ? added</l>
</lg>

<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>

<lg>
<l>III., 4, 132: observe                  handle</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  146: royall sir              comma added</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>IV., 1,  14: Princesse               Empresse</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 1'>IV., 3,  36: they                    hee</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   43: fraide                  defray'd</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   62: camer                   cancer</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  132: this admiration         thie</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>V., 3,  47: flights                 s deleted</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"   85: niggle                  iuggle</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  111: I fever                 if ever</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'>"  190: my grace on all         cancelled</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
The corrections in this play are nearly all good: thus the
metre is restored at I., 2, 178, and III., 2, 93, and improved in
III., 4, 132. V., 3, 85 is an excellent emendation. On the
other hand, I do not think the author would have made such
a stupid mistake as the one found at IV., 1, 14, for Chrysapius
is there addressing the Empress, about Pulcheria.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>The Maid of Honour</hi>
</p>

<p>
Nil.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Note by Mr. Edmund Gosse.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In 1877, when he was breaking up his home at Clifton, and
disposing of his books, John Addington Symonds gave Mr.
Edmund Gosse a thick volume containing eight first editions
of plays by Massinger. The book was bound in worn old calf
of the period, and had stamped on the back the author's
name. Symonds, in giving the book to Mr. Gosse, called his
attention to the contemporary corrections in ink, and said
there was <q>a tradition</q> that they were in the handwriting
of Massinger himself. Mr. Gosse, unfortunately, broke up the
volume and had the eight plays separately bound, but the
old binding had contained no further indication. In 1882
Swinburne made a careful examination of the corrections,
and again in 1883, when he urged that they should be published.
He became persuaded that they were made by Massinger
himself. Nothing, however, has until now been done
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
with them. The volume came from the Harbord library at
Gunton in Norfolk, and was sold, with other old books, at
the death of the fourth Lord Suffield in 1853. Symonds
bought it of an Oxford bookseller when he was an undergraduate.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Appendix XX. Bibliography</head>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>W. Archer</hi>: <q>The Elizabethan Stage</q> (Quarterly Review,
No. 415, April, 1908).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>R. Boyle</hi>: Dictionary of National Biography: <q>Massinger.</q>
</p>

<p>
" Englische Studien (Heilbronn): <q>On Beaumont,
Fletcher, and Massinger,</q> v. 74, vii, 66,
viii. 39, ix. 209, x. 383.
</p>

<p>
"    New Shakespeare Society Transactions, part ii.,
1880-85, xviii., pp. 371-399: <q>Massinger and
The Two Noble Kinsmen.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> Discussion
on March 9, 1883, p. 66.)
</p>

<p>
"    New Shakespeare Society Transactions, 1880-86,
xxi., pp. 443-488: <q>Henry the Eighth.</q>
</p>

<p>
"    New Shakespeare Society Transactions, 1886,
xxvi., pp. 579-628.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A. C. Bradley</hi>: Oxford Lectures on Poetry: <q>Shakespeare
the Man, and Shakespeare's Theatre and Audience.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A. H. Bullen</hi>: Dictionary of National Biography: <q>Fletcher.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>H. Coleridge</hi>: Preface to Massinger and Ford. 1840.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>S. T. Coleridge</hi>: Lectures on Shakespeare and the Poets
(T. Ashe, 1883), pp. 403-407, 427, 432, 437, 534, 540.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>W. T. Courthope</hi>: History of English Poetry, vol. iv., pp. 348-369.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>T. Coxeter</hi>: The dramatic works of P. Massinger: 1761.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Lieut.-Col. F. Cunningham</hi>: The plays of P. Massinger:
Chatto and Windus: 1870.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Downes</hi>: Roscius Anglicanus.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Edinburgh Review</hi>, No. 23, 1808. (Review of Gifford's
edition.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>F. G. Fleay</hi>: Biographical Chronicle of the English Drama.
</p>

<p>
"    Chronicle History of the London Stage, 1559-1642.
</p>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>F. G. Fleay</hi>: Chronicle History of W. Shakespeare.
</p>

<p>
"   New Shakespeare Society Transactions, 1874,
vol. i., No. 2: <q>On Metrical Tests as applied
to Dramatic Poetry</q> (Fletcher, Beaumont,
Massinger.)
</p>

<p>
"   Shakespeare Manual.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gardiner</hi>: <q>The Political Element in Massinger.</q> (Contemporary
Review, August, 1876): reprinted in New
Shakespeare Society Transactions, 1875, No. xi., pp. 314-332.
(<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi> also History of England, 1884, vol. vii.,
pp. 327 and 337)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Garnett and Gosse</hi>: English Literature: an Illustrated
Record. Heinemann.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Gayley and Brander Matthews</hi>: Representative English
Comedies, vol. iii. New York, 1914.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>W. Gifford</hi>: 1805. Second edition, 1813.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>W. W. Greg</hi>: Henslowe's Diary, vol. ii., pp. 165, 171, 224.
1904-08.
</p>

<p>
"   Henslowe Papers, pp. 66, 70, 74, 85. 1907.
</p>

<p>
"   List of English Plays written before 1643 and
printed before 1700. Bibliographical Society,
1900.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hallam</hi>: Literature of Europe, part iii., chap. vi.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Hazlitt</hi>: Lectures on Elizabethan Literature, pp. 131-136.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>E. Koeppel</hi>: Cambridge History of English Literature, vol. vi.,
chap, vi.: <q>Massinger.</q>
</p>

<p>
"   Quellen Studien zu den Dramen George Chapman's,
Philip Massinger's, und John Ford's.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>C. Lamb</hi>: Specimens of English Dramatic Poets.<note place='foot'>Add references in Letters, edited by C. Ainger, vol. i.,
pp. 23, 24, 136, 154.</note>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>G. C. Macaulay</hi>: Cambridge History of English Literature,
vol. vi., chap. v.: <q>Beaumont and Fletcher.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>J. Monck Mason</hi>: Dramatic Works, 1779.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>E. H. C. Oliphant</hi>: Englische Studien, xiv., xv., xvi.
</p>

<p>
"   Modern Language Review, iii., 337-355;
iv., 190-199, 342-351.
</p>

<p>
"   Problems of Authorship in the Elizabethan
Drama. Chicago, 1911.
</p>

<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>J. Phelan</hi>: Dissertation (Halle), 1878. This careful performance
contains information about Massinger's family.
(<hi rend='italic'>Cf.</hi>, however, Furnivall's Protest in Anglia, ii.,
p. 504.)
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>J. M. Robertson</hi>: The Baconian Heresy, chap. iii.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>G. Saintsbury</hi>: Cambridge History of English Literature,
vol. v., chap, viii.: <q>Shakespeare.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Schelling</hi>: Elizabethan Drama, 1908.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Shakespeare's England</hi>: Oxford University Press, 1916.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>L. Stephen</hi>: Hours in a Library, vol. ii.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A. C. Swinburne</hi>: Contemporaries of Shakespeare (Gosse
and Wise).
</p>

<p>
"   Fortnightly Review, July, 1889.
</p>

<p>
"   Letters (Gosse and Wise), Nos. lxii.
and lxxiii.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>A. Symons</hi>: Mermaid Series, two volumes.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Ashley H. Thorndike</hi>: Tragedy. Constable, 1908.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>L. Wann</hi>: Shakespeare Studies (University of Wisconsin), vii.:
<q>The Collaboration of Beaumont, Fletcher, and Massinger.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Sir A. W. Ward</hi>: Cambridge History of English Literature,
vol. v., chap. xiv.
</p>

<p>
"  History of English Dramatic Literature,
especially vol. iii., pp. 1-47.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index</head>

<lg>
<l>A</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Aeschylus</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Alliteration in M., <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Appendix_XVIII'>App. XVIII</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristophanes, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aristotle, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Armada, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Aubrey, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>À Wood, A., <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>B</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bashful Lover, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg058'>58</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beaumont, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Beethoven, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Believe as You List</hi>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_VII'>App. VII.</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_VIII'>App. VIII</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Besant, Sir W., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boccaccio, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bondman, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Boyle, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97-104</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg131'>131</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_III'>App. III.</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bradley, A. C., <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 16</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bridges, R., <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooke, R., <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Brooke, Tucker, <ref target='Pg095'>95-97</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Browne, Sir T., <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Buckingham, Duke of, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bullen, A. H., <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Appendix_III'>App. III.</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bunyan, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>C</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catalogue lines, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cayet, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cervantes, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Chapman, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Charles I., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cibber, Colley, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>City Madam, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cokaine, Sir A., <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Coleridge, S. T., <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Collier, J., <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Corneille, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Courthope, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Croker, T. Crofton, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cunningham, F., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>D</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Daborne, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Davies, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dekker, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_X'>App. X.</ref>, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Diderot, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dostoevsky, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Double Falsehood, The</hi>, <ref target='Appendix_XV'>App. XV.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Downes, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dryden, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dublin MS., <ref target='Appendix_XVII'>App. XVII.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Duke of Milan, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>E</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Emperor of the East, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Euripides, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>F</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fair Penitent, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fatal Dowry, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_XI'>App:. XI.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Field, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_XI'>App. XI</ref>.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fielding, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Fleay, F. G., <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg057'>57</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>

<lg>
<l>Fletcher, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_III'>App. III.</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ford, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>G</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gardiner, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Garrick, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gayley, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Georgian Poets, The, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gibbon, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gifford, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_IX'>App. IX.</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Goffe, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gosse, E., <ref target='Appendix_XIX'>App. XIX.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gounod, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Great Duke of Florence, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greene, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Greg, W. W., <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grosart, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Guardian, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>H</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hallam, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hazlitt, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Henry VIII.</hi>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84-91</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Henslowe, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Herbert, Sir H., <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Heywood, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Homer, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Hroswitha, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>J</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>James I., <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Johnson, S., <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> n. 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jonson, Ben, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg113'>113-116</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>K</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kean, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kemble, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Knacke to Know a Knave, A</hi>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Koeppel, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kyd, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>L</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lamb, C., <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg199'>199</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Langbaine, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lee, Sir Sidney, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Love Lost in the Dark</hi>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lyly, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>M</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Macaulay, G. C., <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Appendix_III'>App. III.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Maid of Honour, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Malone, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marlowe, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 10</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Marston, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massinger, Arthur, <ref target='Pg001'>1</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Massinger, Philip: life, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>religion, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of Spanish, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>death, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>politics, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>stagecraft, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>style, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>versification, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>faults, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>imitation of Shakspere, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>introduction of doctors, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>method, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>favourite words, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>character, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of epithets, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of assonances, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>knowledge of Greek, <ref target='Appendix_II'>App. II.</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>a metrical peculiarity, <ref target='Appendix_VI'>App. VI.</ref>;</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>use of alliteration, <ref target='Appendix_XVIII'>App. XVIII.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthews, Brander, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 4, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Matthieu, P., <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Appendix_XIV'>App. XIV.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Middleton, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_XVI'>App. XVI.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Milton, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monck Mason, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Montgomery, Philip, Earl of Pembroke and, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Mozart, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>N</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>New Way to Pay Old Debts, A</hi>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg122'>122</ref>, <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nichol Smith, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>O</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Old Law, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oliphant, E. H. C., <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ovid, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>P</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Parliament of Love, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref>, <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, App. IX.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Peele, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pembroke, second Earl of, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pembroke, third Earl of, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pepys, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Phelan, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philipps, Halliwell, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Picture, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>

<lg>
<l>Plautus, <ref target='Pg002'>2</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg104'>104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Powerful Favourite, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Appendix_XIV'>App. XIV.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Prince of Tarent, The</hi>, vide <hi rend='italic'>A Very Woman</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prynne, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Puritans, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>R</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Renegado, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg075'>75</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Repetition of words and phrases, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Richardson, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Roman Actor, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rosenbach, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rowe, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rowley, W., <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg141'>141</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>S</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schelling, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 5, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schmidt, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scott, Sir W., <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sea scenes, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Second Maiden's Tragedy, The</hi>, <ref target='Appendix_XIII'>App. XIII.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Sero sed Serio</hi>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shakspere, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg056'>56</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77-80</ref>, <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg085'>85</ref>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg091'>91</ref>, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg121'>121-123</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Appendix_IV'>App. IV.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shelley, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Shirley, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg126'>126</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Signorelli, Luca, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Simpson, P., <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg133'>133</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Sir J. V. O. Barnavelt</hi>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Appendix_XII'>App. XII.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sophocles, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stephen, Sir Leslie, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Stevenson, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Strangest Adventure, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Subordinates combined, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Swinburne, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sykes, Dugdale, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Symonds, J. A., <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>T</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Taylor, J., <ref target='Pg124'>124</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theobald, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Torture on stage, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tourneur, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Turks, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Two Noble Kinsmen, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg092'>92-104</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>U</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Unnatural Combat, The</hi>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg069'>69</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_XVIII'>App. XVIII.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>V</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Very Woman, A</hi>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg100'>100</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Virgil, <ref target='Pg127'>127</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Virgin Martyr</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>The</hi>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><ref target='Pg073'>73</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg120'>120</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Appendix_X'>App. X.</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vocabulary of M., <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>W</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warburton, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, App. V.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ward, Sir A., <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 1, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Warner, Sir G. F., <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Weber, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 6</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Webster, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 2, <ref target='Pg111'>111-113</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wit and Fancy in a Maze</hi>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>n.</hi> 3</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Z</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Zielinski, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>

<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
